@node Associations, Procedures, Miscellaneous Datatypes, Top
@chapter Associations

MIT/GNU Scheme provides several mechanisms for associating objects with
one another.  Each of these mechanisms creates a link between one or
more objects, called @dfn{keys}, and some other object, called a
@dfn{datum}.  Beyond this common idea, however, each of the mechanisms
has various different properties that make it appropriate in different
situations:

@itemize @bullet
@item
@dfn{Association lists} are one of Lisp's oldest association mechanisms.
Because they are made from ordinary pairs, they are easy to build and
manipulate, and very flexible in use.  However, the average lookup time
for an association list is linear in the number of associations.

@item
@dfn{1D tables} have a very simple interface, making them easy to use,
and offer the feature that they do not prevent their keys from being
reclaimed by the garbage collector.  Like association lists, their
average lookup time is linear in the number of associations; but 1D
tables aren't as flexible.

@item
@cindex property list
@dfn{The association table} is MIT/GNU Scheme's equivalent to the
@dfn{property lists} of Lisp.  It has the advantages that the keys may
be any type of object and that it does not prevent the keys from being
reclaimed by the garbage collector.  However, two linear-time lookups
must be performed, one for each key, whereas for traditional property
lists only one lookup is required for both keys.

@item
@dfn{Hash tables} are a powerful mechanism with constant-time access to
large amounts of data.  Hash tables are not as flexible as association
lists, but because their access times are independent of the number of
associations in the table, for most applications they are the mechanism
of choice.

@item
@dfn{Balanced binary trees} are another association mechanism that is
useful for applications in which the keys are ordered.  Binary trees
have access times that are proportional to the logarithm of the number
of associations in the tree.  While they aren't as fast as hash tables,
they offer the advantage that the contents of the tree can be converted
to a sorted alist in linear time.  Additionally, two trees can be
compared for equality in worst-case linear time.

@item
@dfn{Red-Black trees} are a kind of balanced binary tree.  The
implementation supports destructive insertion and deletion operations
with a good constant factor.

@item
@dfn{Weight-Balanced trees} are a kind of balanced binary tree.  The
implementation provides non-destructive operations.  There is a
comprehensive set of operations, including: a constant-time size
operation; many high-level operations such as the set operations union,
intersection and difference; and indexing of elements by position.

@end itemize

@menu
* Association Lists::           
* 1D Tables::                   
* The Association Table::       
* Hash Tables::                 
* Object Hashing::              
* Red-Black Trees::             
* Weight-Balanced Trees::       
@end menu

@node Association Lists, 1D Tables, Associations, Associations
@section Association Lists

@comment **** begin CLTL ****
@cindex association list (defn)
@cindex list, association (defn)
@cindex alist (defn)
@cindex key, of association list element (defn)
An @dfn{association list}, or @dfn{alist}, is a data structure used very
frequently in Scheme.  An alist is a list of pairs, each of which is
called an @dfn{association}.  The car of an association is called the
@dfn{key}.

An advantage of the alist representation is that an alist can be
incrementally augmented simply by adding new entries to the front.
Moreover, because the searching procedures @code{assv} et al.@: search the
alist in order, new entries can ``shadow'' old entries.  If an alist is
viewed as a mapping from keys to data, then the mapping can be not only
augmented but also altered in a non-destructive manner by adding new
entries to the front of the alist.@footnote{This introduction is taken
from @cite{Common Lisp, The Language}, second edition, p.@: 431.}
@comment **** end CLTL ****

@deffn procedure alist? object
@cindex type predicate, for alist
@findex list?
Returns @code{#t} if @var{object} is an association list (including the
empty list); otherwise returns @code{#f}.  Any @var{object} satisfying this
predicate also satisfies @code{list?}.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure assq object alist
@deffnx procedure assv object alist
@deffnx procedure assoc object alist
@cindex searching, of alist
@findex eq?
@findex eqv?
@findex equal?
These procedures find the first pair in @var{alist} whose car field is
@var{object}, and return that pair; the returned pair is always an
@emph{element} of @var{alist}, @emph{not} one of the pairs from which
@var{alist} is composed.  If no pair in @var{alist} has @var{object} as
its car, @code{#f} (n.b.: not the empty list) is returned.  @code{assq}
uses @code{eq?} to compare @var{object} with the car fields of the pairs
in @var{alist}, while @code{assv} uses @code{eqv?} and @code{assoc} uses
@code{equal?}.@footnote{Although they are often used as predicates,
@code{assq}, @code{assv}, and @code{assoc} do not have question marks in
their names because they return useful values rather than just @code{#t}
or @code{#f}.}

@example
@group
(define e '((a 1) (b 2) (c 3)))
(assq 'a e)                             @result{}  (a 1)
(assq 'b e)                             @result{}  (b 2)
(assq 'd e)                             @result{}  #f
(assq (list 'a) '(((a)) ((b)) ((c))))   @result{}  #f
(assoc (list 'a) '(((a)) ((b)) ((c))))  @result{}  ((a))
(assq 5 '((2 3) (5 7) (11 13)))         @result{}  @r{unspecified}
(assv 5 '((2 3) (5 7) (11 13)))         @result{}  (5 7)
@end group
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn procedure association-procedure predicate selector
Returns an association procedure that is similar to @code{assv}, except
that @var{selector} (a procedure of one argument) is used to select the
key from the association, and @var{predicate} (an equivalence predicate)
is used to compare the key to the given item.  This can be used to make
association lists whose elements are, say, vectors instead of pairs
(also @pxref{Searching Lists}).

For example, here is how @code{assv} could be implemented:

@example
(define assv (association-procedure eqv? car))
@end example

Another example is a ``reverse association'' procedure:

@example
(define rassv (association-procedure eqv? cdr))
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn procedure del-assq object alist
@deffnx procedure del-assv object alist
@deffnx procedure del-assoc object alist
@cindex deletion, of alist element
@findex eq?
@findex eqv?
@findex equal?
These procedures return a newly allocated copy of @var{alist} in which
all associations with keys equal to @var{object} have been removed.
Note that while the returned copy is a newly allocated list, the
association pairs that are the elements of the list are shared with
@var{alist}, not copied.  @code{del-assq} uses @code{eq?} to compare
@var{object} with the keys, while @code{del-assv} uses @code{eqv?} and
@code{del-assoc} uses @code{equal?}.

@example
@group
(define a
  '((butcher . "231 e22nd St.")
    (baker . "515 w23rd St.")
    (hardware . "988 Lexington Ave.")))

(del-assq 'baker a)
     @result{}
     ((butcher . "231 e22nd St.")
      (hardware . "988 Lexington Ave."))
@end group
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn procedure del-assq! object alist
@deffnx procedure del-assv! object alist
@deffnx procedure del-assoc! object alist
@findex eq?
@findex eqv?
@findex equal?
These procedures remove from @var{alist} all associations with keys
equal to @var{object}.  They return the resulting list.
@code{del-assq!} uses @code{eq?} to compare @var{object} with the keys,
while @code{del-assv!} uses @code{eqv?} and @code{del-assoc!} uses
@code{equal?}.  These procedures are like @code{del-assq},
@code{del-assv}, and @code{del-assoc}, respectively, except that they
destructively modify @var{alist}.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure delete-association-procedure deletor predicate selector
@findex list-deletor
@findex list-deletor!
This returns a deletion procedure similar to @code{del-assv} or
@code{del-assq!}.  The @var{predicate} and @var{selector} arguments are
the same as those for @code{association-procedure}, while the
@var{deletor} argument should be either the procedure
@code{list-deletor} (for non-destructive deletions), or the procedure
@code{list-deletor!} (for destructive deletions).

For example, here is a possible implementation of @code{del-assv}:

@example
@group
(define del-assv 
  (delete-association-procedure list-deletor eqv? car))
@end group
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn procedure alist-copy alist
@cindex copying, of alist
@findex list-copy
Returns a newly allocated copy of @var{alist}.  This is similar to
@code{list-copy} except that the ``association'' pairs, i.e.@: the
elements of the list @var{alist}, are also copied.  @code{alist-copy}
could have been implemented like this:

@example
@group
(define (alist-copy alist)
  (if (null? alist)
      '()
      (cons (cons (car (car alist)) (cdr (car alist)))
            (alist-copy (cdr alist)))))
@end group
@end example
@end deffn

@node 1D Tables, The Association Table, Association Lists, Associations
@section 1D Tables

@cindex 1D table (defn)
@cindex one-dimensional table (defn)
@cindex table, one-dimensional (defn)
@cindex weak pair, and 1D table
@dfn{1D tables} (``one-dimensional'' tables) are similar to association
lists.  In a 1D table, unlike an association list, the keys of the table
are held @dfn{weakly}: if a key is garbage-collected, its associated
value in the table is removed.  1D tables compare their keys for
equality using @code{eq?}.

@cindex property list
1D tables can often be used as a higher-performance alternative to the
two-dimensional association table (@pxref{The Association Table}).  If
one of the keys being associated is a compound object such as a vector,
a 1D table can be stored in one of the vector's slots.  Under these
circumstances, accessing items in a 1D table will be comparable in
performance to using a property list in a conventional Lisp.

@deffn procedure make-1d-table
Returns a newly allocated empty 1D table.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure 1d-table? object
@cindex type predicate, for 1D table
@findex list?
Returns @code{#t} if @var{object} is a 1D table, otherwise returns
@code{#f}.  Any object that satisfies this predicate also satisfies
@code{list?}.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure 1d-table/put! 1d-table key datum
Creates an association between @var{key} and @var{datum} in
@var{1d-table}.  Returns an unspecified value.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure 1d-table/remove! 1d-table key
Removes any association for @var{key} in @var{1d-table} and returns an
unspecified value.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure 1d-table/get 1d-table key default
Returns the @var{datum} associated with @var{key} in @var{1d-table}.  If
there is no association for @var{key}, @var{default} is returned.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure 1d-table/lookup 1d-table key if-found if-not-found
@var{If-found} must be a procedure of one argument, and
@var{if-not-found} must be a procedure of no arguments.  If
@var{1d-table} contains an association for @var{key}, @var{if-found} is
invoked on the @var{datum} of the association.  Otherwise,
@var{if-not-found} is invoked with no arguments.  In either case, the
result of the invoked procedure is returned as the result of
@code{1d-table/lookup}.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure 1d-table/alist 1d-table
Returns a newly allocated association list that contains the same
information as @var{1d-table}.
@end deffn

@node The Association Table, Hash Tables, 1D Tables, Associations
@section The Association Table

@cindex association table (defn)
@cindex table, association (defn)
@cindex property list
@findex eq?
MIT/GNU Scheme provides a generalization of the property-list mechanism
found in most other implementations of Lisp: a global two-dimensional
@dfn{association table}.  This table is indexed by two keys, called
@var{x-key} and @var{y-key} in the following procedure descriptions.
These keys and the datum associated with them can be arbitrary objects.
@code{eq?} is used to discriminate keys.

Think of the association table as a matrix: a single datum can be
accessed using both keys, a column using @var{x-key} only, and a row
using @var{y-key} only.

@deffn procedure 2d-put! x-key y-key datum
Makes an entry in the association table that associates @var{datum} with
@var{x-key} and @var{y-key}.  Returns an unspecified result.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure 2d-remove! x-key y-key
If the association table has an entry for @var{x-key} and @var{y-key},
it is removed.  Returns an unspecified result.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure 2d-get x-key y-key
Returns the @var{datum} associated with @var{x-key} and @var{y-key}.
Returns @code{#f} if no such association exists.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure 2d-get-alist-x x-key
Returns an association list of all entries in the association table that
are associated with @var{x-key}.  The result is a list of
@code{(@var{y-key} . @var{datum})} pairs.  Returns the empty list if no
entries for @var{x-key} exist.

@example
@group
(2d-put! 'foo 'bar 5)
(2d-put! 'foo 'baz 6)
(2d-get-alist-x 'foo)           @result{}  ((baz . 6) (bar . 5))
@end group
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn procedure 2d-get-alist-y y-key
Returns an association list of all entries in the association table that
are associated with @var{y-key}.  The result is a list of
@code{(@var{x-key} . @var{datum})} pairs.  Returns the empty list if no
entries for @var{y-key} exist.

@example
@group
(2d-put! 'bar 'foo 5)
(2d-put! 'baz 'foo 6)
(2d-get-alist-y 'foo)           @result{}  ((baz . 6) (bar . 5))
@end group
@end example
@end deffn

@node Hash Tables, Object Hashing, The Association Table, Associations
@section Hash Tables

@cindex hash table
Hash tables are a fast, powerful mechanism for storing large numbers of
associations.  MIT/GNU Scheme's hash tables feature automatic resizing,
customizable growth parameters, and customizable hash procedures.

The average times for the insertion, deletion, and lookup operations on
a hash table are bounded by a constant.  The space required by the table
is proportional to the number of associations in the table; the
constant of proportionality is described below (@pxref{Resizing of Hash
Tables}).

(Previously, the hash-table implementation was a run-time-loadable
option, but as of release 7.7.0 it is loaded by default.  It's no longer
necessary to call @code{load-option} prior to using hash tables.)

@menu
* Construction of Hash Tables::  
* Basic Hash Table Operations::  
* Resizing of Hash Tables::     
* Address Hashing::             
@end menu

@node Construction of Hash Tables, Basic Hash Table Operations, Hash Tables, Hash Tables
@subsection Construction of Hash Tables

@cindex construction, of hash table
The next few procedures are hash-table constructors.  All hash table
constructors are procedures that accept one optional argument,
@var{initial-size}, and return a newly allocated hash table.  If
@var{initial-size} is given, it must be an exact non-negative integer or
@code{#f}.  The meaning of @var{initial-size} is discussed below
(@pxref{Resizing of Hash Tables}).

@cindex equivalence predicate, of hash table
@cindex strongly held keys, of hash table
@cindex weakly held keys, of hash table
Hash tables are normally characterized by two things: the equivalence
predicate that is used to compare keys, and whether or not the table
allows its keys to be reclaimed by the garbage collector.  If a table
prevents its keys from being reclaimed by the garbage collector, it is
said to hold its keys @dfn{strongly}; otherwise it holds its keys
@dfn{weakly} (@pxref{Weak Pairs}).

@deffn procedure make-strong-eq-hash-table [initial-size]
@findex eq?
Returns a newly allocated hash table that accepts arbitrary objects as
keys, and compares those keys with @code{eq?}.  The keys are held
strongly.  These are the fastest of the standard hash tables.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure make-weak-eq-hash-table [initial-size]
@findex eq?
Returns a newly allocated hash table that accepts arbitrary objects as
keys, and compares those keys with @code{eq?}.  The keys are held
weakly.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure make-eq-hash-table [initial-size]
@findex eq?
This is an alias for @code{make-weak-eq-hash-table}.

@strong{Warning}:  This will become an alias for
@code{make-strong-eq-hash-table} instead.  We recommend that you use
@code{make-weak-eq-hash-table} explicitly for weak hash tables.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure make-strong-eqv-hash-table [initial-size]
@findex eqv?
Returns a newly allocated hash table that accepts arbitrary objects as
keys, and compares those keys with @code{eqv?}.  The keys are held
strongly.  These hash tables are a little slower than those made by
@code{make-strong-eq-hash-table}.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure make-weak-eqv-hash-table [initial-size]
@findex eqv?
Returns a newly allocated hash table that accepts arbitrary objects as
keys, and compares those keys with @code{eqv?}.  The keys are held
weakly, except that booleans, characters, numbers, and interned symbols
are held strongly.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure make-eqv-hash-table [initial-size]
@findex eqv?
This is an alias for @code{make-weak-eqv-hash-table}.

@strong{Warning}:  This will become an alias for
@code{make-strong-eqv-hash-table} instead.  We recommend that you use
@code{make-weak-eqv-hash-table} explicitly for weak hash tables.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure make-equal-hash-table [initial-size]
@findex equal?
Returns a newly allocated hash table that accepts arbitrary objects as
keys, and compares those keys with @code{equal?}.  The keys are held
strongly.  These hash tables are quite a bit slower than those made by
@code{make-strong-eq-hash-table}.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure make-string-hash-table [initial-size]
@findex string=?
Returns a newly allocated hash table that accepts character strings as
keys, and compares them with @code{string=?}.  The keys are held
strongly.
@end deffn

The next two procedures are used to create new hash-table constructors.
All of the above hash table constructors, with the exception of
@code{make-eqv-hash-table}, could have been created by calls to these
``constructor-constructors''; see the examples below.

@deffn procedure strong-hash-table/constructor key-hash key=? [rehash-after-gc?]
@deffnx procedure weak-hash-table/constructor key-hash key=? [rehash-after-gc?]
@cindex hashing, of key in hash table
@cindex modulus, of hashing procedure
Each of these procedures accepts two arguments and returns a hash-table
constructor.  The @var{key=?} argument is an equivalence predicate for
the keys of the hash table.  The @var{key-hash} argument is a procedure
that computes a hash number.  Specifically, @var{key-hash} accepts two
arguments, a key and an exact positive integer (the @dfn{modulus}), and
returns an exact non-negative integer that is less than the modulus.

The optional argument @var{rehash-after-gc?}, if true, says that the
values returned by @var{key-hash} might change after a garbage
collection.  If so, the hash-table implementation arranges for the table
to be rehashed when necessary.  (@xref{Address Hashing}, for
information about hash procedures that have this property.)  Otherwise,
it is assumed that @var{key-hash} always returns the same value for the
same arguments.  The default value of this argument is @code{#f}.

The constructors returned by @code{strong-hash-table/constructor} make
hash tables that hold their keys strongly.  The constructors returned by
@code{weak-hash-table/constructor} make hash tables that hold their keys
weakly.
@end deffn

Some examples showing how some standard hash-table constructors could have
been defined:

@findex eq-hash-mod
@findex eq?
@findex equal-hash-mod
@findex equal?
@findex string-hash-mod
@findex string=?
@example
@group
(define make-weak-eq-hash-table
  (weak-hash-table/constructor eq-hash-mod eq? #t))

(define make-equal-hash-table
  (strong-hash-table/constructor equal-hash-mod equal? #t))

(define make-string-hash-table
  (strong-hash-table/constructor string-hash-mod string=? #f))
@end group
@end example

The following procedure is sometimes useful in conjunction with weak
hash tables.  Normally it is not needed, because such hash tables clean
themselves automatically as they are used.

@deffn procedure hash-table/clean! hash-table
If @var{hash-table} is a type of hash table that holds its @var{key}s
weakly, this procedure recovers any space that was being used to record
associations for objects that have been reclaimed by the garbage
collector.  Otherwise, this procedure does nothing.  In either case, it
returns an unspecified result.
@end deffn

@node Basic Hash Table Operations, Resizing of Hash Tables, Construction of Hash Tables, Hash Tables
@subsection Basic Hash Table Operations

The procedures described in this section are the basic operations on
hash tables.  They provide the functionality most often needed by
programmers.  Subsequent sections describe other operations that provide
additional functionality needed by some applications.

@deffn procedure hash-table? object
@cindex type predicate, for hash table
Returns @code{#t} if @var{object} is a hash table, otherwise returns
@code{#f}.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure hash-table/put! hash-table key datum
Associates @var{datum} with @var{key} in @var{hash-table} and returns an
unspecified result.  The average time required by this operation is
bounded by a constant.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure hash-table/get hash-table key default
Returns the datum associated with @var{key} in @var{hash-table}.  If
there is no association for @var{key}, @var{default} is returned.  The
average time required by this operation is bounded by a constant.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure hash-table/remove! hash-table key
If @var{hash-table} has an association for @var{key}, removes it.
Returns an unspecified result.  The average time required by this
operation is bounded by a constant.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure hash-table/clear! hash-table
Removes all associations in @var{hash-table} and returns an unspecified
result.  The average and worst-case times required by this operation are
bounded by a constant.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure hash-table/count hash-table
Returns the number of associations in @var{hash-table} as an exact
non-negative integer.  If @var{hash-table} holds its keys weakly, this
is a conservative upper bound that may count some associations whose
keys have recently been reclaimed by the garbage collector.  The average
and worst-case times required by this operation are bounded by a
constant.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure hash-table->alist hash-table
Returns the contents of @var{hash-table} as a newly allocated alist.
Each element of the alist is a pair @code{(@var{key} . @var{datum})}
where @var{key} is one of the keys of @var{hash-table}, and @var{datum}
is its associated datum.  The average and worst-case times required by
this operation are linear in the number of associations
in the table.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure hash-table/key-list hash-table
Returns a newly allocated list of the keys in @var{hash-table}.  The
average and worst-case times required by this operation are linear in
the number of associations in the table.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure hash-table/datum-list hash-table
Returns a newly allocated list of the datums in @var{hash-table}.  Each
element of the list corresponds to one of the associations in
@var{hash-table}; if the table contains multiple associations with the
same datum, so will this list.  The average and worst-case times
required by this operation are linear in the number of associations in
the table.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure hash-table/for-each hash-table procedure
@var{Procedure} must be a procedure of two arguments.  Invokes
@var{procedure} once for each association in @var{hash-table}, passing
the association's @var{key} and @var{datum} as arguments, in that order.
Returns an unspecified result.  @var{Procedure} must not modify
@var{hash-table}, with one exception: it is permitted to call
@code{hash-table/remove!} to remove the association being processed.
@end deffn

The following procedure is an alternate form of @code{hash-table/get}
that is useful in some situations.  Usually, @code{hash-table/get} is
preferable because it is faster.

@deffn procedure hash-table/lookup hash-table key if-found if-not-found
@var{If-found} must be a procedure of one argument, and
@var{if-not-found} must be a procedure of no arguments.  If
@var{hash-table} contains an association for @var{key}, @var{if-found}
is invoked on the datum of the association.  Otherwise,
@var{if-not-found} is invoked with no arguments.  In either case, the
result yielded by the invoked procedure is returned as the result of
@code{hash-table/lookup} (@code{hash-table/lookup} @emph{reduces} into
the invoked procedure, i.e.@: calls it tail-recursively).  The average
time required by this operation is bounded by a constant.
@end deffn

@node Resizing of Hash Tables, Address Hashing, Basic Hash Table Operations, Hash Tables
@subsection Resizing of Hash Tables

@cindex resizing, of hash table
@cindex size, of hash table (defn)
Normally, hash tables automatically resize themselves according to need.
Because of this, the programmer need not be concerned with management of
the table's size.  However, some limited control over the table's size
is provided, which will be discussed below.  This discussion involves
two concepts, @dfn{usable size} and @dfn{physical size}, which we will
now define.

@cindex usable size, of hash table (defn)
The @dfn{usable size} of a hash table is the number of associations that
the table can hold at a given time.  If the number of associations in
the table exceeds the usable size, the table will automatically grow,
increasing the usable size to a new value that is sufficient to hold the
associations.

@cindex physical size, of hash table (defn)
The @dfn{physical size} is an abstract measure of a hash table that
specifies how much space is allocated to hold the associations of the
table.  The physical size is always greater than or equal to the usable
size.  The physical size is not interesting in itself; it is interesting
only for its effect on the performance of the hash table.  While the
average performance of a hash-table lookup is bounded by a constant, the
worst-case performance is not.  For a table containing a given number of
associations, increasing the physical size of the table decreases the
probability that worse-than-average performance will occur.

The physical size of a hash table is statistically related to the number
of associations.  However, it is possible to place bounds on the
physical size, and from this to estimate the amount of space used by the
table:

@example
@group
(define (hash-table-space-bounds count rehash-size rehash-threshold)
  (let ((tf (/ 1 rehash-threshold)))
    (values (if (exact-integer? rehash-size)
                (- (* count (+ 4 tf))
                   (* tf (+ rehash-size rehash-size)))
                (* count (+ 4 (/ tf (* rehash-size rehash-size)))))
            (* count (+ 4 tf)))))
@end group
@end example

@noindent
What this formula shows is that, for a ``normal'' rehash size (that is,
not an exact integer), the amount of space used by the hash table is
proportional to the number of associations in the table.  The constant
of proportionality varies statistically, with the low bound being

@example
(+ 4 (/ (/ 1 rehash-threshold) (* rehash-size rehash-size)))
@end example

@noindent
and the high bound being

@example
(+ 4 (/ 1 rehash-threshold))
@end example

@noindent
which, for the default values of these parameters, are @code{4.25} and
@code{5}, respectively.  Reducing the rehash size will tighten these
bounds, but increases the amount of time spent resizing, so you can see
that the rehash size gives some control over the time-space tradeoff of
the table.

The programmer can control the size of a hash table by means of three
parameters:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Each table's @var{initial-size} may be specified when the table is
created.

@item
Each table has a @dfn{rehash size} that specifies how the size of the
table is changed when it is necessary to grow or shrink the table.

@item
Each table has a @dfn{rehash threshold} that specifies the relationship
of the table's physical size to its usable size.
@end itemize

@cindex initial size, of hash table
If the programmer knows that the table will initially contain a specific
number of items, @var{initial-size} can be given when the table is
created.  If @var{initial-size} is an exact non-negative integer, it
specifies the initial usable size of the hash table; the table will not
change size until the number of items in the table exceeds
@var{initial-size}, after which automatic resizing is enabled and
@var{initial-size} no longer has any effect.  Otherwise, if
@var{initial-size} is not given or is @code{#f}, the table is
initialized to an unspecified size and automatic resizing is immediately
enabled.

@cindex rehash size, of hash table (defn)
The @dfn{rehash size} specifies how much to increase the usable size of
the hash table when it becomes full.  It is either an exact positive
integer, or a real number greater than one.  If it is an integer, the
new size is the sum of the old size and the rehash size.  Otherwise, it
is a real number, and the new size is the product of the old size and
the rehash size.  Increasing the rehash size decreases the average cost
of an insertion, but increases the average amount of space used by the
table.  The rehash size of a table may be altered dynamically by the
application in order to optimize the resizing of the table; for example,
if the table will grow quickly for a known period and afterwards will
not change size, performance might be improved by using a large rehash
size during the growth phase and a small one during the static phase.
The default rehash size of a newly constructed hash table is @code{2.0}.

@strong{Warning}: The use of an exact positive integer for a rehash
size is almost always undesirable; this option is provided solely for
compatibility with the Common Lisp hash-table mechanism.  The reason for
this has to do with the time penalty for resizing the hash table.  The
time needed to resize a hash table is proportional to the
number of associations in the table.  This resizing cost is
@dfn{amortized} across the insertions required to fill the table to the
point where it needs to grow again.  If the table grows by an amount
proportional to the number of associations, then the cost of
resizing and the increase in size are both proportional to the
number of associations, so the @dfn{amortized cost} of an insertion
operation is still bounded by a constant.  However, if the table grows
by a constant amount, this is not true: the amortized cost of an
insertion is not bounded by a constant.  Thus, using a constant rehash
size means that the average cost of an insertion increases
proportionally to the number of associations in the hash table.

@cindex rehash threshold, of hash table (defn)
The @dfn{rehash threshold} is a real number, between zero exclusive and
one inclusive, that specifies the ratio between a hash table's usable
size and its physical size.  Decreasing the rehash threshold decreases
the probability of worse-than-average insertion, deletion, and lookup
times, but increases the physical size of the table for a given usable
size.  The default rehash threshold of a newly constructed hash table is
@code{1}.

@deffn procedure hash-table/size hash-table
Returns the usable size of @var{hash-table} as an exact positive
integer.  This is the number of associations that @var{hash-table} can
hold before it will grow.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure hash-table/rehash-size hash-table
Returns the rehash size of @var{hash-table}.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure set-hash-table/rehash-size! hash-table x
@var{X} must be either an exact positive integer, or a real number that
is greater than one.  Sets the rehash size of @var{hash-table} to
@var{x} and returns an unspecified result.  This operation adjusts the
``shrink threshold'' of the table; the table might shrink if the number
of associations is less than the new threshold.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure hash-table/rehash-threshold hash-table
Returns the rehash threshold of @var{hash-table}.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure set-hash-table/rehash-threshold! hash-table x
@var{X} must be a real number between zero exclusive and one inclusive.
Sets the rehash threshold of @var{hash-table} to @var{x} and returns an
unspecified result.  This operation does not change the usable size of
the table, but it usually changes the physical size of the table, which
causes the table to be rehashed.
@end deffn

@node Address Hashing,  , Resizing of Hash Tables, Hash Tables
@subsection Address Hashing
@cindex address hashing

The procedures described in this section may be used to make very
efficient key-hashing procedures for arbitrary objects.  All of these
procedures are based on @dfn{address hashing}, which uses the address of
an object as its hash number.  The great advantage of address hashing is
that converting an arbitrary object to a hash number is extremely fast
and takes the same amount of time for any object.

The disadvantage of address hashing is that the garbage collector
changes the addresses of most objects.  The hash-table implementation
compensates for this disadvantage by automatically rehashing tables that
use address hashing when garbage collections occur.  Thus, in order to
use these procedures for key hashing, it is necessary to tell the
hash-table implementation (by means of the @var{rehash-after-gc?}
argument to the ``constructor-constructor'' procedure) that the hash
numbers computed by your key-hashing procedure must be recomputed after
a garbage collection.

@deffn procedure eq-hash object
@deffnx procedure eqv-hash object
@deffnx procedure equal-hash object
These procedures return a hash number for @var{object}.  The result is
always a non-negative integer, and in the case of @code{eq-hash}, a
non-negative fixnum.  Two objects that are equivalent according to
@code{eq?}, @code{eqv?}, or @code{equal?}, respectively, will produce the
same hash number when passed as arguments to these procedures, provided
that the garbage collector does not run during or between the two calls.
@end deffn

The following procedures are the key-hashing procedures used by the
standard address-hash-based hash tables.

@deffn procedure eq-hash-mod object modulus
This procedure is the key-hashing procedure used by
@code{make-strong-eq-hash-table}.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure eqv-hash-mod object modulus
This procedure is the key-hashing procedure used by
@code{make-strong-eqv-hash-table}.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure equal-hash-mod object modulus
This procedure is the key-hashing procedure used by
@code{make-equal-hash-table}.
@end deffn

@node Object Hashing, Red-Black Trees, Hash Tables, Associations
@section Object Hashing

@cindex object hashing
@cindex hashing, of object
The MIT/GNU Scheme object-hashing facility provides a mechanism for
generating a unique hash number for an arbitrary object.  This hash
number, unlike an object's address, is unchanged by garbage collection.
The object-hashing facility is useful in conjunction with hash tables,
but it may be used for other things as well.  In particular, it is used
in the generation of the written representation for many objects
(@pxref{Custom Output}).

All of these procedures accept an optional argument called @var{table};
this table contains the object-integer associations.  If given, this
argument must be an object-hash table as constructed by
@code{hash-table/make} (see below).  If not given, a default table is
used.

@deffn procedure hash object [table]
@findex eq?
@code{hash} associates an exact non-negative integer with @var{object}
and returns that integer.  If @code{hash} was previously called with
@var{object} as its argument, the integer returned is the same as was
returned by the previous call.  @code{hash} guarantees that distinct
objects (in the sense of @code{eq?}) are associated with distinct
integers.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure unhash k [table]
@code{unhash} takes an exact non-negative integer @var{k} and returns
the object associated with that integer.  If there is no object
associated with @var{k}, or if the object previously associated with
@var{k} has been reclaimed by the garbage collector, an error of type
@code{condition-type:bad-range-argument} is signalled.  In other words,
if @code{hash} previously returned @var{k} for some object, and that
object has not been reclaimed, it is the value of the call to
@code{unhash}.
@findex condition-type:bad-range-argument
@end deffn

An object that is passed to @code{hash} as an argument is not protected
from being reclaimed by the garbage collector.  If all other references
to that object are eliminated, the object will be reclaimed.
Subsequently calling @code{unhash} with the hash number of the (now
reclaimed) object will signal an error.

@example
@group
(define x (cons 0 0))           @result{}  @r{unspecified}
(hash x)                        @result{}  77
(eqv? (hash x) (hash x))        @result{}  #t
(define x 0)                    @result{}  @r{unspecified}
(gc-flip)                       @r{;force a garbage collection}
(unhash 77)                     @error{}
@end group
@end example

@deffn procedure object-hashed? object [table]
This predicate is true if @var{object} has an associated hash number.
Otherwise it is false.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure valid-hash-number? k [table]
This predicate is true if @var{k} is the hash number associated with
some object.  Otherwise it is false.
@end deffn

The following two procedures provide a lower-level interface to the
object-hashing mechanism.

@deffn procedure object-hash object [table [insert?]]
@findex eq?
@code{object-hash} is like @code{hash}, except that it accepts an
additional optional argument, @var{insert?}.  If @var{insert?}@: is
supplied and is @code{#f}, @code{object-hash} will return an integer for
@var{object} only if there is already an association in the table;
otherwise, it will return @code{#f}.  If @var{insert?} is not supplied,
or is not @code{#f}, @code{object-hash} always returns an integer,
creating an association in the table if necessary.

@code{object-hash} additionally treats @code{#f} differently than does
@code{hash}.  Calling @code{object-hash} with @code{#f} as its argument
will return an integer that, when passed to @code{unhash}, will signal
an error rather than returning @code{#f}.  Likewise,
@code{valid-hash-number?} will return @code{#f} for this integer.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure object-unhash k [table]
@code{object-unhash} is like @code{unhash}, except that when @var{k} is
not associated with any object or was previously associated with an
object that has been reclaimed, @code{object-unhash} returns @code{#f}.
This means that there is an ambiguity in the value returned by
@code{object-unhash}: if @code{#f} is returned, there is no way to
tell if @var{k} is associated with @code{#f} or is not associated with
any object at all.
@end deffn

Finally, this procedure makes new object-hash tables:

@deffn procedure hash-table/make
This procedure creates and returns a new, empty object-hash table that
is suitable for use as the optional @var{table} argument to the above
procedures.  The returned table contains no associations.
@end deffn

@node Red-Black Trees, Weight-Balanced Trees, Object Hashing, Associations
@section Red-Black Trees

@cindex trees, balanced binary
@cindex balanced binary trees
@cindex binary trees
@cindex red-black binary trees
Balanced binary trees are a useful data structure for maintaining large
sets of associations whose keys are ordered.  While most applications
involving large association sets should use hash tables, some
applications can benefit from the use of binary trees.  Binary trees
have two advantages over hash tables:

@itemize @bullet
@item
The contents of a binary tree can be converted to an alist, sorted by
key, in time proportional to the number of associations in the
tree.  A hash table can be converted into an unsorted alist in linear
time; sorting it requires additional time.

@item
Two binary trees can be compared for equality in linear time.  Hash
tables, on the other hand, cannot be compared at all; they must be
converted to alists before comparison can be done, and alist comparison
is quadratic unless the alists are sorted.
@end itemize

MIT/GNU Scheme provides an implementation of @dfn{red-black} trees.  The
red-black tree-balancing algorithm provides generally good performance
because it doesn't try to keep the tree very closely balanced.  At any
given node in the tree, one side of the node can be twice as high as the
other in the worst case.  With typical data the tree will remain fairly
well balanced anyway.

A red-black tree takes space that is proportional to the number of
associations in the tree.  For the current implementation, the constant
of proportionality is eight words per association.

Red-black trees hold their keys @dfn{strongly}.  In other words, if a
red-black tree contains an association for a given key, that key cannot
be reclaimed by the garbage collector.

@cindex run-time-loadable option
@cindex option, run-time-loadable
The red-black tree implementation is a run-time-loadable option.  To use
red-black trees, execute

@example
(load-option 'rb-tree)
@end example
@findex load-option

@noindent
once before calling any of the procedures defined here.

@deffn procedure make-rb-tree key=? key<?
This procedure creates and returns a newly allocated red-black tree.
The tree contains no associations.  @var{Key=?} and @var{key<?} are
predicates that compare two keys and determine whether they are equal to
or less than one another, respectively.  For any two keys, at most one
of these predicates is true.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure rb-tree? object
Returns @code{#t} if @var{object} is a red-black tree, otherwise
returns @code{#f}.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure rb-tree/insert! rb-tree key datum
Associates @var{datum} with @var{key} in @var{rb-tree} and returns an
unspecified value.  If @var{rb-tree} already has an association for
@var{key}, that association is replaced.  The average and worst-case
times required by this operation are proportional to the logarithm of
the number of assocations in @var{rb-tree}.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure rb-tree/lookup rb-tree key default
Returns the datum associated with @var{key} in @var{rb-tree}.  If
@var{rb-tree} doesn't contain an association for @var{key},
@var{default} is returned.  The average and worst-case times required by
this operation are proportional to the logarithm of the number of
assocations in @var{rb-tree}.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure rb-tree/delete! rb-tree key
If @var{rb-tree} contains an association for @var{key}, removes it.
Returns an unspecified value.  The average and worst-case times required
by this operation are proportional to the logarithm of the number of
assocations in @var{rb-tree}.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure rb-tree->alist rb-tree
Returns the contents of @var{rb-tree} as a newly allocated alist.  Each
element of the alist is a pair @code{(@var{key} . @var{datum})} where
@var{key} is one of the keys of @var{rb-tree}, and @var{datum} is its
associated datum.  The alist is sorted by key according to the
@var{key<?} argument used to construct @var{rb-tree}.  The
time required by this operation is proportional to the
number of associations in the tree.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure rb-tree/key-list rb-tree
Returns a newly allocated list of the keys in @var{rb-tree}.  The list
is sorted by key according to the @var{key<?} argument used to construct
@var{rb-tree}.  The time required by this
operation is proportional to the number of associations in the tree.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure rb-tree/datum-list rb-tree
Returns a newly allocated list of the datums in @var{rb-tree}.  Each
element of the list corresponds to one of the associations in
@var{rb-tree}, so if the tree contains multiple associations with the
same datum, so will this list.  The list is sorted by the keys of the
associations, even though they do not appear in the result.  The time required by this operation is proportional to the
number of associations in the tree.

This procedure is equivalent to:

@example
(lambda (rb-tree) (map cdr (rb-tree->alist rb-tree)))
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn procedure rb-tree/equal? rb-tree-1 rb-tree-2 datum=?
Compares @var{rb-tree-1} and @var{rb-tree-2} for equality, returning
@code{#t} iff they are equal and @code{#f} otherwise.  The trees must
have been constructed with the same equality and order predicates (same
in the sense of @code{eq?}).  The keys of the trees are compared using
the @var{key=?} predicate used to build the trees, while the datums of
the trees are compared using the equivalence predicate @var{datum=?}.
The worst-case time required by this operation is proportional to the
number of associations in the tree.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure rb-tree/empty? rb-tree
Returns @code{#t} iff @var{rb-tree} contains no associations.  Otherwise
returns @code{#f}.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure rb-tree/size rb-tree
Returns the number of associations in @var{rb-tree}, an exact
non-negative integer.  The average and worst-case times required by this
operation are proportional to the number of associations in the tree.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure rb-tree/height rb-tree
Returns the height of @var{rb-tree}, an exact non-negative integer.
This is the length of the longest path from a leaf of the tree to the
root.  The average and worst-case times required by this operation are
proportional to the number of associations in the tree.

The returned value satisfies the following:

@example
@group
(lambda (rb-tree)
  (let ((size (rb-tree/size rb-tree))
        (lg (lambda (x) (/ (log x) (log 2)))))
    (<= (lg size)
        (rb-tree/height rb-tree)
        (* 2 (lg (+ size 1))))))
@end group
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn procedure rb-tree/copy rb-tree
Returns a newly allocated copy of @var{rb-tree}.  The copy is identical
to @var{rb-tree} in all respects, except that changes to @var{rb-tree}
do not affect the copy, and vice versa.  The time required by this
operation is proportional to the number of associations in the tree.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure alist->rb-tree alist key=? key<?
Returns a newly allocated red-black tree that contains the same
associations as @var{alist}.  This procedure is equivalent to:

@example
@group
(lambda (alist key=? key<?)
  (let ((tree (make-rb-tree key=? key<?)))
    (for-each (lambda (association)
                (rb-tree/insert! tree
                                 (car association)
                                 (cdr association)))
              alist)
    tree))
@end group
@end example
@end deffn

The following operations provide access to the smallest and largest
members in a red/black tree.  They are useful for implementing priority
queues.

@deffn procedure rb-tree/min rb-tree default
Returns the smallest key in @var{rb-tree}, or @var{default} if the tree
is empty.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure rb-tree/min-datum rb-tree default
Returns the datum associated with the smallest key in @var{rb-tree}, or
@var{default} if the tree is empty.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure rb-tree/min-pair rb-tree
Finds the smallest key in @var{rb-tree} and returns a pair containing
that key and its associated datum.  If the tree is empty, returns
@code{#f}.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure rb-tree/max rb-tree default
Returns the largest key in @var{rb-tree}, or @var{default} if the tree
is empty.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure rb-tree/max-datum rb-tree default
Returns the datum associated with the largest key in @var{rb-tree}, or
@var{default} if the tree is empty.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure rb-tree/max-pair rb-tree
Finds the largest key in @var{rb-tree} and returns a pair containing
that key and its associated datum.  If the tree is empty, returns
@code{#f}.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure rb-tree/delete-min! rb-tree default
@deffnx procedure rb-tree/delete-min-datum! rb-tree default
@deffnx procedure rb-tree/delete-min-pair! rb-tree
@deffnx procedure rb-tree/delete-max! rb-tree default
@deffnx procedure rb-tree/delete-max-datum! rb-tree default
@deffnx procedure rb-tree/delete-max-pair! rb-tree
These operations are exactly like the accessors above, in that they
return information associated with the smallest or largest key, except
that they simultaneously delete that key.
@end deffn

@node Weight-Balanced Trees,  , Red-Black Trees, Associations
@section Weight-Balanced Trees

@cindex trees, balanced binary
@cindex balanced binary trees
@cindex binary trees
@cindex weight-balanced binary trees
Balanced binary trees are a useful data structure for maintaining large
sets of ordered objects or sets of associations whose keys are ordered.
MIT/GNU Scheme has a comprehensive implementation of weight-balanced binary
trees which has several advantages over the other data structures for
large aggregates:

@itemize @bullet
@item
In addition to the usual element-level operations like insertion,
deletion and lookup, there is a full complement of collection-level
operations, like set intersection, set union and subset test, all of
which are implemented with good orders of growth in time and space.
This makes weight-balanced trees ideal for rapid prototyping of
functionally derived specifications.

@item
An element in a tree may be indexed by its position under the ordering
of the keys, and the ordinal position of an element may be determined,
both with reasonable efficiency.

@item
Operations to find and remove minimum element make weight-balanced trees
simple to use for priority queues.

@item
The implementation is @emph{functional} rather than @emph{imperative}.
This means that operations like `inserting' an association in a tree do
not destroy the old tree, in much the same way that @code{(+ 1 x)}
modifies neither the constant 1 nor the value bound to @code{x}.  The
trees are referentially transparent thus the programmer need not worry
about copying the trees.  Referential transparency allows space
efficiency to be achieved by sharing subtrees.
@end itemize

These features make weight-balanced trees suitable for a wide range of
applications, especially those that require large numbers of sets or
discrete maps.  Applications that have a few global databases and/or
concentrate on element-level operations like insertion and lookup are
probably better off using hash tables or red-black trees.

The @emph{size} of a tree is the number of associations that it
contains.  Weight-balanced binary trees are balanced to keep the sizes
of the subtrees of each node within a constant factor of each other.
This ensures logarithmic times for single-path operations (like lookup
and insertion).  A weight-balanced tree takes space that is proportional
to the number of associations in the tree.  For the current
implementation, the constant of proportionality is six words per
association.

@cindex binary trees, as sets
@cindex binary trees, as discrete maps
@cindex sets, using binary trees
@cindex discrete maps, using binary trees
Weight-balanced trees can be used as an implementation for either
discrete sets or discrete maps (associations).  Sets are implemented by
ignoring the datum that is associated with the key.  Under this scheme
if an association exists in the tree this indicates that the key of the
association is a member of the set.  Typically a value such as
@code{()}, @code{#t} or @code{#f} is associated with the key.

Many operations can be viewed as computing a result that, depending on
whether the tree arguments are thought of as sets or maps, is known by
two different names.  An example is @code{wt-tree/member?}, which, when
regarding the tree argument as a set, computes the set membership
operation, but, when regarding the tree as a discrete map,
@code{wt-tree/member?} is the predicate testing if the map is defined at
an element in its domain.  Most names in this package have been chosen
based on interpreting the trees as sets, hence the name
@code{wt-tree/member?} rather than @code{wt-tree/defined-at?}.

@cindex run-time-loadable option
@cindex option, run-time-loadable
The weight-balanced tree implementation is a run-time-loadable option.
To use weight-balanced trees, execute

@example
(load-option 'wt-tree)
@end example
@findex load-option

@noindent
once before calling any of the procedures defined here.

@menu
* Construction of Weight-Balanced Trees::  
* Basic Operations on Weight-Balanced Trees::  
* Advanced Operations on Weight-Balanced Trees::  
* Indexing Operations on Weight-Balanced Trees::  
@end menu

@node Construction of Weight-Balanced Trees, Basic Operations on Weight-Balanced Trees, Weight-Balanced Trees, Weight-Balanced Trees
@subsection Construction of Weight-Balanced Trees

Binary trees require there to be a total order on the keys used to
arrange the elements in the tree.  Weight-balanced trees are organized
by @emph{types}, where the type is an object encapsulating the ordering
relation.  Creating a tree is a two-stage process.  First a tree type
must be created from the predicate that gives the ordering.  The tree type
is then used for making trees, either empty or singleton trees or trees
from other aggregate structures like association lists.  Once created, a
tree `knows' its type and the type is used to test compatibility between
trees in operations taking two trees.  Usually a small number of tree
types are created at the beginning of a program and used many times
throughout the program's execution.

@deffn procedure make-wt-tree-type key<?
This procedure creates and returns a new tree type based on the ordering
predicate @var{key<?}.
@var{Key<?} must be a total ordering, having the property that for all
key values @code{a}, @code{b} and @code{c}:

@example
@group
(key<? a a)                         @result{} #f
(and (key<? a b) (key<? b a))       @result{} #f
(if (and (key<? a b) (key<? b c))
    (key<? a c)
    #t)                             @result{} #t
@end group
@end example

@noindent
Two key values are assumed to be equal if neither is less than the other
by @var{key<?}.

Each call to @code{make-wt-tree-type} returns a distinct value, and
trees are only compatible if their tree types are @code{eq?}.  A
consequence is that trees that are intended to be used in binary-tree
operations must all be created with a tree type originating from the
same call to @code{make-wt-tree-type}.
@end deffn

@defvr variable number-wt-type
A standard tree type for trees with numeric keys.  @code{Number-wt-type}
could have been defined by

@example
(define number-wt-type (make-wt-tree-type  <))
@end example
@end defvr

@defvr variable string-wt-type
A standard tree type for trees with string keys.  @code{String-wt-type}
could have been defined by

@example
(define string-wt-type (make-wt-tree-type  string<?))
@end example
@end defvr

@deffn procedure make-wt-tree wt-tree-type
This procedure creates and returns a newly allocated weight-balanced
tree.  The tree is empty, i.e. it contains no associations.
@var{Wt-tree-type} is a weight-balanced tree type obtained by calling
@code{make-wt-tree-type}; the returned tree has this type.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure singleton-wt-tree wt-tree-type key datum
This procedure creates and returns a newly allocated weight-balanced
tree.  The tree contains a single association, that of @var{datum} with
@var{key}.  @var{Wt-tree-type} is a weight-balanced tree type obtained
by calling @code{make-wt-tree-type}; the returned tree has this type.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure alist->wt-tree tree-type alist
Returns a newly allocated weight-balanced tree that contains the same
associations as @var{alist}.  This procedure is equivalent to:

@example
@group
(lambda (type alist)
  (let ((tree (make-wt-tree type)))
    (for-each (lambda (association)
                (wt-tree/add! tree
                              (car association)
                              (cdr association)))
              alist)
    tree))
@end group
@end example
@end deffn

@node Basic Operations on Weight-Balanced Trees, Advanced Operations on Weight-Balanced Trees, Construction of Weight-Balanced Trees, Weight-Balanced Trees
@subsection Basic Operations on Weight-Balanced Trees

This section describes the basic tree operations on weight-balanced
trees.  These operations are the usual tree operations for insertion,
deletion and lookup, some predicates and a procedure for determining the
number of associations in a tree.

@deffn procedure wt-tree? object
Returns @code{#t} if @var{object} is a weight-balanced tree, otherwise
returns @code{#f}.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure wt-tree/empty? wt-tree
Returns @code{#t} if @var{wt-tree} contains no associations, otherwise
returns @code{#f}.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure wt-tree/size wt-tree
Returns the number of associations in @var{wt-tree}, an exact
non-negative integer.  This operation takes constant time.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure wt-tree/add wt-tree key datum
Returns a new tree containing all the associations in @var{wt-tree} and
the association of @var{datum} with @var{key}.  If @var{wt-tree} already
had an association for @var{key}, the new association overrides the old.
The average and worst-case times required by this operation are
proportional to the logarithm of the number of associations in
@var{wt-tree}.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure wt-tree/add! wt-tree key datum
Associates @var{datum} with @var{key} in @var{wt-tree} and returns an
unspecified value.  If @var{wt-tree} already has an association for
@var{key}, that association is replaced.  The average and worst-case
times required by this operation are proportional to the logarithm of
the number of associations in @var{wt-tree}.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure wt-tree/member? key wt-tree
Returns @code{#t} if @var{wt-tree} contains an association for
@var{key}, otherwise returns @code{#f}.  The average and worst-case
times required by this operation are proportional to the logarithm of
the number of associations in @var{wt-tree}.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure wt-tree/lookup wt-tree key default
Returns the datum associated with @var{key} in @var{wt-tree}.  If
@var{wt-tree} doesn't contain an association for @var{key},
@var{default} is returned.  The average and worst-case times required by
this operation are proportional to the logarithm of the number of
associations in @var{wt-tree}.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure wt-tree/delete wt-tree key
Returns a new tree containing all the associations in @var{wt-tree},
except that if @var{wt-tree} contains an association for @var{key}, it
is removed from the result.  The average and worst-case times required
by this operation are proportional to the logarithm of the number of
associations in @var{wt-tree}.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure wt-tree/delete! wt-tree key
If @var{wt-tree} contains an association for @var{key} the association
is removed.  Returns an unspecified value.  The average and worst-case
times required by this operation are proportional to the logarithm of
the number of associations in @var{wt-tree}.
@end deffn

@node Advanced Operations on Weight-Balanced Trees, Indexing Operations on Weight-Balanced Trees, Basic Operations on Weight-Balanced Trees, Weight-Balanced Trees
@subsection Advanced Operations on Weight-Balanced Trees

In the following the @emph{size} of a tree is the number of associations
that the tree contains, and a @emph{smaller} tree contains fewer
associations.

@deffn procedure wt-tree/split< wt-tree bound
Returns a new tree containing all and only the associations in
@var{wt-tree} that have a key that is less than @var{bound} in the
ordering relation of the tree type of @var{wt-tree}.  The average and
worst-case times required by this operation are proportional to the
logarithm of the size of @var{wt-tree}.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure wt-tree/split> wt-tree bound
Returns a new tree containing all and only the associations in
@var{wt-tree} that have a key that is greater than @var{bound} in the
ordering relation of the tree type of @var{wt-tree}.  The average and
worst-case times required by this operation are proportional to the
logarithm of the size of @var{wt-tree}.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure wt-tree/union wt-tree-1 wt-tree-2
Returns a new tree containing all the associations from both trees.
This operation is asymmetric: when both trees have an association for
the same key, the returned tree associates the datum from @var{wt-tree-2}
with the key.  Thus if the trees are viewed as discrete maps then
@code{wt-tree/union} computes the map override of @var{wt-tree-1} by
@var{wt-tree-2}.  If the trees are viewed as sets the result is the set
union of the arguments.
The worst-case time required by this operation
is proportional to the sum of the sizes of both trees.
If the minimum key of one tree is greater than the maximum key of
the other tree then the worst-case time required is proportional to
the logarithm of the size of the larger tree.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure wt-tree/intersection wt-tree-1 wt-tree-2
Returns a new tree containing all and only those associations from
@var{wt-tree-1} that have keys appearing as the key of an association
in @var{wt-tree-2}.  Thus the associated data in the result are those
from @var{wt-tree-1}.  If the trees are being used as sets the result is
the set intersection of the arguments.  As a discrete map operation,
@code{wt-tree/intersection} computes the domain restriction of
@var{wt-tree-1} to (the domain of) @var{wt-tree-2}.
The worst-case time required by this operation is proportional to
the sum of the sizes of the trees.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure wt-tree/difference wt-tree-1 wt-tree-2
Returns a new tree containing all and only those associations from
@var{wt-tree-1} that have keys that @emph{do not} appear as the key of
an association in @var{wt-tree-2}.  If the trees are viewed as sets the
result is the asymmetric set difference of the arguments.  As a discrete
map operation, it computes the domain restriction of @var{wt-tree-1} to
the complement of (the domain of) @var{wt-tree-2}.
The worst-case time required by this operation is proportional to
the sum of the sizes of the trees.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure wt-tree/subset? wt-tree-1 wt-tree-2
Returns @code{#t} iff the key of each association in @var{wt-tree-1} is
the key of some association in @var{wt-tree-2}, otherwise returns @code{#f}.
Viewed as a set operation, @code{wt-tree/subset?} is the improper subset
predicate.
A proper subset predicate can be constructed:

@example
@group
(define (proper-subset? s1 s2)
  (and (wt-tree/subset? s1 s2)
       (< (wt-tree/size s1) (wt-tree/size s2))))
@end group
@end example

As a discrete map operation, @code{wt-tree/subset?} is the subset
test on the domain(s) of the map(s).  In the worst-case the time
required by this operation is proportional to the size of
@var{wt-tree-1}.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure wt-tree/set-equal? wt-tree-1 wt-tree-2
Returns @code{#t} iff for every association in @var{wt-tree-1} there is
an association in @var{wt-tree-2} that has the same key, and @emph{vice
versa}.

Viewing the arguments as sets, @code{wt-tree/set-equal?} is the set
equality predicate.  As a map operation it determines if two maps are
defined on the same domain.

This procedure is equivalent to

@example
@group
(lambda (wt-tree-1 wt-tree-2)
  (and (wt-tree/subset? wt-tree-1 wt-tree-2
       (wt-tree/subset? wt-tree-2 wt-tree-1)))
@end group
@end example

In the worst case the time required by this operation is proportional to
the size of the smaller tree.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure wt-tree/fold combiner initial wt-tree
This procedure reduces @var{wt-tree} by combining all the associations,
using an reverse in-order traversal, so the associations are visited in
reverse order.  @var{Combiner} is a procedure of three arguments: a key,
a datum and the accumulated result so far.  Provided @var{combiner}
takes time bounded by a constant, @code{wt-tree/fold} takes time
proportional to the size of @var{wt-tree}.

A sorted association list can be derived simply:

@example
@group
(wt-tree/fold (lambda (key datum list)
                (cons (cons key datum) list))
              '()
              @var{wt-tree}))
@end group
@end example

The data in the associations can be summed like this:

@example
@group
(wt-tree/fold (lambda (key datum sum) (+ sum datum))
              0
              @var{wt-tree})
@end group
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn procedure wt-tree/for-each action wt-tree
This procedure traverses @var{wt-tree} in order, applying @var{action} to
each association.
The associations are processed in increasing order of their keys.
@var{Action} is a procedure of two arguments that takes the key and
datum respectively of the association.
Provided @var{action} takes time bounded by a constant,
@code{wt-tree/for-each} takes time proportional to the size of
@var{wt-tree}.
The example prints the tree:

@example
@group
(wt-tree/for-each (lambda (key value)
                    (display (list key value)))
                  @var{wt-tree}))
@end group
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn procedure wt-tree/union-merge wt-tree-1 wt-tree-2 merge
Returns a new tree containing all the associations from both trees.  If
both trees have an association for the same key, the datum associated
with that key in the result tree is computed by applying the procedure
@var{merge} to the key, the value from @var{wt-tree-1} and the value
from @var{wt-tree-2}.  @var{Merge} is of the form

@example
(lambda (@var{key} @var{datum-1} @var{datum-2}) @dots{})
@end example

If some key occurs only in one tree, that association will appear in the
result tree without being processed by @var{merge}, so for this
operation to make sense, either @var{merge} must have both a right and
left identity that correspond to the association being absent in one of
the trees, or some guarantee must be made, for example, all the keys in
one tree are known to occur in the other.

These are all reasonable procedures for @var{merge}

@example
@group
(lambda (key val1 val2) (+ val1 val2))
(lambda (key val1 val2) (append val1 val2))
(lambda (key val1 val2) (wt-tree/union val1 val2))
@end group
@end example

However, a procedure like

@example
(lambda (key val1 val2) (- val1 val2))
@end example

would result in a subtraction of the data for all associations with keys
occuring in both trees but associations with keys occuring in only the
second tree would be copied, not negated, as is presumably be intent.
The programmer might ensure that this never happens.

This procedure has the same time behavior as @code{wt-tree/union} but
with a slightly worse constant factor.  Indeed, @code{wt-tree/union}
might have been defined like this:

@example
@group
(define (wt-tree/union tree1 tree2)
  (wt-tree/union-merge tree1 tree2
                       (lambda (key val1 val2) val2)))
@end group
@end example
@end deffn

The @var{merge} procedure takes the @var{key} as a parameter in case the
data are not independent of the key.


@node Indexing Operations on Weight-Balanced Trees,  , Advanced Operations on Weight-Balanced Trees, Weight-Balanced Trees
@subsection Indexing Operations on Weight-Balanced Trees

Weight-balanced trees support operations that view the tree as sorted
sequence of associations.  Elements of the sequence can be accessed by
position, and the position of an element in the sequence can be
determined, both in logarthmic time.

@deffn procedure wt-tree/index wt-tree index
@deffnx procedure wt-tree/index-datum wt-tree index
@deffnx procedure wt-tree/index-pair wt-tree index
Returns the 0-based @var{index}th association of @var{wt-tree} in the
sorted sequence under the tree's ordering relation on the keys.
@code{wt-tree/index} returns the @var{index}th key,
@code{wt-tree/index-datum} returns the datum associated with the
@var{index}th key and @code{wt-tree/index-pair} returns a new pair
@code{(@var{key} . @var{datum})} which is the @code{cons} of the
@var{index}th key and its datum.  The average and worst-case times
required by this operation are proportional to the logarithm of the
number of associations in the tree.

These operations signal a condition of type
@code{condition-type:bad-range-argument} if @var{index}@code{<0} or if
@var{index} is greater than or equal to the number of associations in
the tree.  If the tree is empty, they signal an anonymous error.

Indexing can be used to find the median and maximum keys in the tree as
follows:

@example
@group
median:   (wt-tree/index @var{wt-tree}
                         (quotient (wt-tree/size @var{wt-tree})
                                   2))
maximum:  (wt-tree/index @var{wt-tree}
                         (- (wt-tree/size @var{wt-tree})
                            1))
@end group
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn procedure wt-tree/rank wt-tree key
Determines the 0-based position of @var{key} in the sorted sequence of
the keys under the tree's ordering relation, or @code{#f} if the tree
has no association with for @var{key}.  This procedure returns either an
exact non-negative integer or @code{#f}.  The average and worst-case
times required by this operation are proportional to the logarithm of
the number of associations in the tree.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure wt-tree/min wt-tree
@deffnx procedure wt-tree/min-datum wt-tree
@deffnx procedure wt-tree/min-pair wt-tree
Returns the association of @var{wt-tree} that has the least key under the tree's ordering relation.
@code{wt-tree/min} returns the least key,
@code{wt-tree/min-datum} returns the datum associated with the
least key and @code{wt-tree/min-pair} returns a new pair
@code{(key . datum)} which is the @code{cons} of the minimum key and its datum.
The average and worst-case times required by this operation are
proportional to the logarithm of the number of associations in the tree.

These operations signal an error if the tree is empty.
They could have been written

@example
@group
(define (wt-tree/min tree)
  (wt-tree/index tree 0))
(define (wt-tree/min-datum tree)
  (wt-tree/index-datum tree 0))
(define (wt-tree/min-pair tree)
  (wt-tree/index-pair tree 0))
@end group
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn procedure wt-tree/delete-min wt-tree
Returns a new tree containing all of the associations in @var{wt-tree}
except the association with the least key under the @var{wt-tree}'s
ordering relation.  An error is signalled if the tree is empty.  The
average and worst-case times required by this operation are proportional
to the logarithm of the number of associations in the tree.  This
operation is equivalent to

@example
(wt-tree/delete @var{wt-tree} (wt-tree/min @var{wt-tree}))
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn procedure wt-tree/delete-min! wt-tree
Removes the association with the least key under the @var{wt-tree}'s
ordering relation.  An error is signalled if the tree is empty.  The
average and worst-case times required by this operation are proportional
to the logarithm of the number of associations in the tree.  This
operation is equivalent to

@example
(wt-tree/delete! @var{wt-tree} (wt-tree/min @var{wt-tree}))
@end example
@end deffn
