@c This file is part of the MIT/GNU Scheme Reference Manual.
@c $Id: error.texi,v 1.1 2003/04/15 03:29:39 cph Exp $

@c Copyright 1991,1992,1993,1994,1995 Massachusetts Institute of Technology
@c Copyright 1996,1997,1999,2000,2001 Massachusetts Institute of Technology
@c Copyright 2002,2003 Massachusetts Institute of Technology
@c See file scheme.texinfo for copying conditions.

@node Error System, Graphics, Operating-System Interface, Top
@chapter Error System

@findex error
The MIT/GNU Scheme error system provides a uniform mechanism for the
signalling of errors and other exceptional conditions.  The simplest and
most generally useful procedures in the error system are:

@table @code
@item error
is used to signal simple errors, specifying a message and some irritant
objects (@pxref{Condition Signalling}).  Errors are usually handled by
stopping the computation and putting the user in an error @sc{repl}.

@item warn
is used to signal warnings (@pxref{Condition Signalling}).  Warnings are
usually handled by printing a message on the console and continuing the
computation normally.

@item ignore-errors
is used to suppress the normal handling of errors within a given dynamic
extent (@pxref{Condition Handling}).  Any error that occurs within the
extent is trapped, returning immediately to the caller of
@code{ignore-errors}.
@end table

More demanding applications require more powerful facilities.  To give a
concrete example, suppose you want floating-point division to return a very
large number whenever the denominator is zero.  This behavior can be
implemented using the error system.

The Scheme arithmetic system can signal many different kinds of errors,
including floating-point divide by zero.  In our example, we would like to
handle this particular condition specially, allowing the system to handle
other arithmetic errors in its usual way.

The error system supports this kind of application by providing
mechanisms for distinguishing different types of error conditions and
for specifying where control should be transferred should a given
condition arise.  In this example, there is a specific object that
represents the ``floating-point divide by zero'' condition type, and it
is possible to dynamically specify an arbitrary Scheme procedure to be
executed when a condition of that type is signalled.  This procedure
then finds the stack frame containing the call to the division operator,
and returns the appropriate value from that frame.

Another useful kind of behavior is the ability to specify uniform
handling for related classes of conditions.  For example, it might be
desirable, when opening a file for input, to gracefully handle a variety of
different conditions associated with the file system.  One such condition
might be that the file does not exist, in which case the program will try
some other action, perhaps opening a different file instead.  Another
related condition is that the file exists, but is read protected, so it
cannot be opened for input.  If these or any other related conditions
occur, the program would like to skip this operation and move on to
something else.

At the same time, errors unrelated to the file system should be treated in
their usual way.  For example, calling @code{car} on the argument @code{3}
should signal an error.  Or perhaps the name given for the file is
syntactically incorrect, a condition that probably wants to be handled
differently from the case of the file not existing.

@cindex taxonomical link, of condition type (defn)
@cindex specialization, of condition types (defn)
@cindex generalization, of condition types (defn)
To facilitate the handling of classes of conditions, the error system
taxonomically organizes all condition types.  The types are related to one
another by @dfn{taxonomical links}, which specify that one type is a ``kind
of'' another type.  If two types are linked this way, one is considered to
be a @dfn{specialization} of the other; or vice-versa, the second is a
@dfn{generalization} of the first.  In our example, all of the errors
associated with opening an input file would be specializations of the
condition type ``cannot open input file''.

@vindex condition-type:simple-condition
@vindex condition-type:warning
@vindex condition-type:breakpoint
@vindex condition-type:serious-condition
The taxonomy of condition types permits any condition type to have no
more than one immediate generalization.  Thus, the condition types form
a forest (set of trees).  While users can create new trees, the standard
taxonomy (@pxref{Taxonomy}) is rooted at
@code{condition-type:serious-condition}, @code{condition-type:warning},
@code{condition-type:simple-condition}, and
@code{condition-type:breakpoint}; users are encouraged to add new
subtypes to these condition types rather than create new trees in the
forest.

To summarize, the error system provides facilities for the following tasks.
The sections that follow will describe these facilities in more
detail.

@table @asis
@item Signalling a condition
@findex signal-condition
A condition may be signalled in a number of different ways.  Simple
errors may be signalled, without explicitly defining a condition type,
using @code{error}.  The @code{signal-condition} procedure provides the
most general signalling mechanism.

@item Handling a condition
@findex bind-condition-handler
The programmer can dynamically specify handlers for particular condition
types or for classes of condition types, by means of the
@code{bind-condition-handler} procedure.  Individual handlers have
complete control over the handling of a condition, and additionally may
decide not to handle a particular condition, passing it on to previously
bound handlers.

@item Restarting from a handler
@findex with-restart
The @code{with-restart} procedure provides a means for
condition-signalling code to communicate to condition-handling code what
must be done to proceed past the condition.  Handlers can examine the
restarts in effect when a condition was signalled, allowing a structured
way to continue an interrupted computation.

@item Packaging condition state
Each condition is represented by an explicit object.  Condition objects
contain information about the nature of the condition, information that
describes the state of the computation from which the condition arose,
and information about the ways the computation can be restarted.

@item Classification of conditions
@cindex condition type
@cindex type, condition
@cindex specialization, of condition types
@cindex generalization, of condition types
Each condition has a type, represented by a condition type object.  Each
condition type may be a specialization of some other condition types.  A
group of types that share a common generalization can be handled
uniformly by specifying a handler for the generalization.
@end table

@menu
* Condition Signalling::        
* Error Messages::              
* Condition Handling::          
* Restarts::                    
* Condition Instances::         
* Condition Types::             
* Taxonomy::                    
@end menu

@node Condition Signalling, Error Messages, Error System, Error System
@section Condition Signalling

@cindex condition signalling (defn)
@cindex signalling, of condition (defn)
@findex make-condition
Once a condition instance has been created using @code{make-condition}
(or any condition constructor), it can be @dfn{signalled}.  The act of
signalling a condition is separated from the act of creating the
condition to allow more flexibility in how conditions are handled.  For
example, a condition instance could be returned as the value of a
procedure, indicating that something unusual has happened, to allow the
caller to clean up some state.  The caller could then signal the
condition once it is ready.

A more important reason for having a separate condition-signalling
mechanism is that it allows @emph{resignalling}.  When a signalled
condition has been caught by a particular handler, and the handler decides
that it doesn't want to process that particular condition, it can signal
the condition again.  This is one way to allow other handlers to get a
chance to see the condition.

@deffn procedure error reason argument @dots{}
@cindex REP loop
@findex signal-condition
@findex warn
This is the simplest and most common way to signal a condition that
requires intervention before a computation can proceed (when
intervention is not required, @code{warn} is more appropriate).
@code{error} signals a condition (using @code{signal-condition}), and if
no handler for that condition alters the flow of control (by invoking a
restart, for example) it calls the procedure
@code{standard-error-handler}, which normally prints an error message
and stops the computation, entering an error @sc{repl}.  Under normal
circumstances @code{error} will not return a value (although an
interactive debugger can be used to force this to occur).

@findex make-condition
@vindex condition-type:simple-error
Precisely what condition is signalled depends on the first argument to
@code{error}.  If @var{reason} is a condition, then that condition is
signalled and the @var{argument}s are ignored.  If @var{reason} is a
condition type, then a new instance of this type is generated and
signalled; the @var{argument}s are used to generate the values of the
fields for this condition type (they are passed as the @var{field-plist}
argument to @code{make-condition}).  In the most common case, however,
@var{reason} is neither a condition nor a condition type, but rather a
string or symbol.  In this case a condition of type
@code{condition-type:simple-error} is created with the @var{message}
field containing the @var{reason} and the @var{irritants} field
containing the @var{argument}s.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure warn reason argument @dots{}
@findex error
@findex signal-condition
@vindex condition-type:simple-warning
When a condition is not severe enough to warrant intervention, it is
appropriate to signal the condition with @code{warn} rather than
@code{error}.  As with @code{error}, @code{warn} first calls
@code{signal-condition}; the condition that is signalled is chosen
exactly as in @code{error} except that a condition of type
@code{condition-type:simple-warning} is signalled if @var{reason} is
neither a condition nor a condition type.  If the condition is not
handled, @code{warn} calls the procedure
@code{standard-warning-handler}, which normally prints a warning message
and continues the computation by returning from @code{warn}.

@findex muffle-warning
@code{warn} establishes a restart named @code{muffle-warning} before
calling @code{signal-condition}.  This allows a signal handler to
prevent the generation of the warning message by calling
@code{muffle-warning}.  The value of a call to @code{warn} is
unspecified.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure signal-condition condition
@cindex generalization, of condition types
@cindex specialization, of condition types
@findex break-on-signals
@findex bind-default-condition-handler
@findex bind-condition-handler
This is the fundamental operation for signalling a condition.  The
precise operation of @code{signal-condition} depends on the condition
type of which @var{condition} is an instance, the condition types set by
@code{break-on-signals}, and the handlers established by
@code{bind-condition-handler} and @code{bind-default-condition-handler}.

@cindex REP loop
If the @var{condition} is an instance of a type that is a specialization
of any of the types specified by @code{break-on-signals}, then a
breakpoint @sc{repl} is initiated.  Otherwise (or when that @sc{repl}
returns), the handlers established by @code{bind-condition-handler} are
checked, most recent first.  Each applicable handler is invoked, and the
search for a handler continues if the handler returns normally.  If all
applicable handlers return, then the applicable handlers established by
@code{bind-default-condition-handler} are checked, again most recent
first.  Finally, if no handlers apply (or all return in a normal
manner), @code{signal-condition} returns an unspecified value.

@emph{Note:} unlike many other systems, the MIT/GNU Scheme runtime library
does @emph{not} establish handlers of any kind.  (However, the Edwin
text editor uses condition handlers extensively.)  Thus, calls to
@code{signal-condition} will return to the caller unless there are user
supplied condition handlers, as the following example shows:

@example
@group
(signal-condition
 (make-condition
  condition-type:error
  (call-with-current-continuation (lambda (x) x))
  '()    @r{; no restarts}
  '()))  @r{; no fields}
@result{}  @r{unspecified}
@end group
@end example
@end deffn

@node Error Messages, Condition Handling, Condition Signalling, Error System
@section Error Messages

@cindex error messages, conventions
@cindex conventions for error messages
By convention, error messages (and in general, the reports generated by
@code{write-condition-report}) should consist of one or more complete
sentences.  The usual rules for sentences should be followed: the first
word of the sentence should be capitalized, and the sentence should be
terminated by a period.  The message should not contain extraneous
whitespace such as line breaks or indentation.


The error system provides a simple formatting language that allows the
programmer to have some control over the printing of error messages.
This formatting language will probably be redesigned in a future
release.

@findex display
@findex write
Error messages typically consist of a string describing the error,
followed by some irritant objects.  The string is printed using
@code{display}, and the irritants are printed using @code{write},
typically with a space between each irritant.  To allow simple
formatting, we introduce a @dfn{noise} object, printed using
@code{display}.  The irritant list may contain ordinary objects
interspersed with noise objects.  Each noise object is printed using
@code{display}, with no extra whitespace, while each normal object is
printed using @code{write}, prefixed by a single space character.

Here is an example:

@example
@group
(define (error-within-procedure message irritant procedure)
  (error message
         irritant
         (error-irritant/noise "within procedure")    
         procedure      
         (error-irritant/noise ".")))
@end group
@end example

@noindent
This would format as follows:

@example
@group
(error-within-procedure "Bad widget" 'widget-32 'invert-widget) @error{}

Bad widget widget-32 within procedure invert-widget.
@end group
@end example

Here are the operations supporting error messages:

@deffn procedure format-error-message message irritants port
@var{Message} is typically a string (although this is not required),
@var{irritants} a list of irritant objects, and @var{port} an output
port.  Formats @var{message} and @var{irritants} to @var{port} in the
standard way.  Note that, during the formatting process, the depth and
breadth to which lists are printed are each limited to small numbers, to
guarantee that the output from each irritant is not arbitrarily large.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure error-irritant/noise value
Creates and returns a noise object whose value is @var{value}.
@end deffn

@node Condition Handling, Restarts, Error Messages, Error System
@section Condition Handling

@cindex handler, condition (defn)
@cindex condition handler (defn)
@findex bind-condition-handler
@findex bind-default-condition-handler
The occurrence of a condition is signalled using
@code{signal-condition}.  @code{signal-condition} attempts to locate and
invoke a @dfn{condition handler} that is prepared to deal with the type
of condition that has occurred.  A condition handler is a procedure of
one parameter, the condition that is being signalled.  A procedure is
installed as a condition handler by calling
@code{bind-condition-handler} (to establish a handler that is in effect
only while a particular thunk is executing) or
@code{bind-default-condition-handler} (to establish a handler that is in
effect permanently).  As implied by the name, handlers created by
@code{bind-default-condition-handler} are invoked only after all other
applicable handlers have been invoked.

A @var{handler} may process a signal in any way it deems appropriate,
but the common patterns are:

@table @asis
@item Ignore the condition.
By returning from the handler in the usual manner.

@item Handle the condition.
By doing some processing and then invoking a restart (or, less
preferably, a continuation) that was established at some point prior to
the call to @code{signal-condition}.

@item Resignal a condition.
By doing some processing and calling @code{signal-condition} with either
the same condition or a newly created one.  In order to support this,
@code{signal-condition} runs @var{handler} in such a way that a
subsequent call to @code{signal-condition} sees only the handlers that
were established prior to this one.
@end table

@cindex REP loop
@findex break-on-signals
As an aid to debugging condition handlers, Scheme maintains a set of
condition types that will cause an interactive breakpoint to occur prior
to normal condition signalling.  That is, @code{signal-condition}
creates a new @sc{repl} prior to its normal operation when its argument
is a condition that is a specialization of any of these types.  The
procedure @code{break-on-signals} establishes this set of condition
types.

@deffn procedure ignore-errors thunk
@findex error
@vindex condition-type:error
Executes @var{thunk} with a condition handler that intercepts the
signalling of any specialization of @code{condition-type:error}
(including those produced by calls to @code{error}) and immediately
terminates the execution of @var{thunk} and returns from the call to
@code{ignore-errors} with the signalled condition as its value.  If
@var{thunk} returns normally, its value is returned from
@code{ignore-errors}.

Notice that @code{ignore-errors} does not ``turn off signalling'' or
condition handling.  Condition handling takes place in the normal manner
but conditions specialized from @code{condition-type:error} are trapped
rather than propogated as they would be by default.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure bind-condition-handler condition-types handler thunk
@findex signal-condition
Invokes @var{thunk} after adding @var{handler} as a condition handler
for the conditions specified by @var{condition-types}.
@var{Condition-types} must be a list of condition types; signalling a
condition whose type is a specialization of any of these types will
cause the @var{handler} to be invoked.  See @code{signal-condition} for
a description of the mechanism used to invoke handlers.

By special extension, if @var{condition-types} is the empty list then
the @var{handler} is called for all conditions.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure bind-default-condition-handler condition-types handler
@findex signal-condition
Installs @var{handler} as a (permanent) condition handler for the
conditions specified by @var{condition-types}.  @var{Condition-types}
must be a list of condition types; signalling a condition whose type is
a specialization of any of these types will cause the @var{handler} to
be invoked.  See @code{signal-condition} for a description of the
mechanism used to invoke handlers.

By special extension, if @var{condition-types} is the empty list then
the @var{handler} is called for all conditions.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure break-on-signals condition-types
@findex signal-condition
@cindex REP loop
Arranges for @code{signal-condition} to create an interactive @sc{repl}
before it signals a condition that is a specialization of any of the
types in the list of @var{condition-types}.  This can be extremely
helpful when trying to debug code that uses custom condition handlers.
In order to create a @sc{repl} when @emph{any} condition type is
signalled it is best to actually put a breakpoint on entry to
@code{signal-condition}.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure standard-error-handler condition
@findex error
@findex ignore-error
@vindex standard-error-hook
@cindex REP loop
Called internally by @code{error} after it calls
@code{signal-condition}.  Normally creates creates a new @sc{repl} with
the prompt @code{"error>"} (but see @code{standard-error-hook}).  In
order to simulate the effect of calling @code{error}, code may call
@code{signal-condition} directly and then call
@code{standard-error-handler} if @code{signal-condition} returns.
@end deffn

@defvr variable standard-error-hook
@findex standard-error-handler
@cindex fluid binding
@cindex dynamic binding
@cindex REP loop
This variable controls the behavior of the procedure
@code{standard-error-handler}, and hence @code{error}.  It is intended
to be bound with @code{fluid-let} and is normally @code{#f}.  It may be
changed to a procedure of one argument and will then be invoked (with
@code{standard-error-hook} rebound to @code{#f}) by
@code{standard-error-handler} just prior to starting the error
@sc{repl}.  It is passed one argument, the condition being signalled.
@end defvr

@deffn procedure standard-warning-handler condition
@vindex standard-warning-hook
@findex signal-condition
@findex notification-output-port
@findex write-condition-report
This is the procedure called internally by @code{warn} after it calls
@code{signal-condition}.  The normal behavior of
@code{standard-warning-handler} is to print a message (but see
@code{standard-warning-hook}).  More precisely, the message is printed
to the port returned by @code{notification-output-port}.  The message is
formed by first printing the string @code{"Warning: "} to this port, and
then calling @code{write-condition-report} on @var{condition} and the port.

@findex muffle-warning
In order to simulate the effect of calling @code{warn}, code may call
@code{signal-condition} directly and then call
@code{standard-warning-handler} if @code{signal-condition} returns.
(This is not sufficient to implement the @code{muffle-warning} protocol,
however.  For that purpose an explicit restart must be provided.)
@end deffn

@defvr variable standard-warning-hook
@findex standard-warning-handler
@cindex fluid binding
@cindex dynamic binding
This variable controls the behavior of the procedure
@code{standard-warning-handler}, and hence @code{warn}.  It is intended
to be bound with @code{fluid-let} and is normally @code{#f}.  It may be
changed to a procedure of one argument and will then be invoked (with
@code{standard-warning-hook} rebound to @code{#f}) by
@code{standard-warning-handler} in lieu of writing the warning message.
It is passed one argument, the condition being signalled.
@end defvr

@node Restarts, Condition Instances, Condition Handling, Error System
@section Restarts

@cindex restart effector (defn)
@cindex effector, restart (defn)
@cindex restart (defn)
@findex with-restart
@findex with-simple-restart
The Scheme error system provides a mechanism, known as @dfn{restarts},
that helps coordinate condition-signalling code with condition-handling
code.  A module of code that detects and signals conditions can provide
procedures (using @code{with-simple-restart} or @code{with-restart}) to
be invoked by handlers that wish to continue, abort, or restart the
computation.  These procedures, called @dfn{restart effectors}, are
encapsulated in restart objects.

@findex find-restart
@findex invoke-restart
@findex invoke-restart-interactively
When a condition object is created, it contains a set of restart
objects, each of which contains a restart effector.  Condition handlers
can inspect the condition they are handling (using @code{find-restart}
to find restarts by name, or @code{condition/restarts} to see the entire
set), and they can invoke the associated effectors (using
@code{invoke-restart} or @code{invoke-restart-interactively}).
Effectors can take arguments, and these may be computed directly by the
condition-handling code or by gathering them interactively from the
user.

@findex abort
@findex continue
@findex muffle-warning
@findex retry
@findex store-value
@findex use-value
@cindex protocol, restart (defn)
@cindex restart protocol
The names of restarts can be chosen arbitrarily, but the choice of name
is significant.  These names are used to coordinate between the
signalling code (which supplies names for restarts) and the handling
code (which typically chooses a restart effector by the name of its
restart).  Thus, the names specify the @dfn{restart protocol}
implemented by the signalling code and invoked by the handling code.
The protocol indicates the number of arguments required by the effector
code as well as the semantics of the arguments.

Scheme provides a conventional set of names (hence, protocols) for
common use.  By choosing the names of restarts from this set, signalling
code can indicate that it is able to perform a small set of fairly
common actions (@code{abort}, @code{continue}, @code{muffle-warning},
@code{retry}, @code{store-value}, @code{use-value}).  In turn, simple
condition-handling code can look for the kind of action it wishes to
perform and simply invoke it by name.  All of Scheme's conventional
names are symbols, although in general restart names are not restricted
to any particular data type.  In addition, the object @code{#f} is
reserved to indicate the ``not for automated use'' protocol: these
restarts should be activated only under human control.

@findex with-simple-restart
Restarts themselves are first-class objects.  They encapsulate their
name, a procedure (known as the @var{effector}) to be executed if they
are invoked, and a thunk (known as the @var{reporter}) that can be
invoked to display a description of the restart (used, for example, by
the interactive debugger).  Invoking a restart is an indication that a
handler has chosen to accept control for a condition; as a consequence,
the @var{effector} of the restart should not return, since this would
indicate that the handler declined to handle the condition.  Thus, the
@var{effector} should call a continuation captured before the
condition-signalling process began.  The most common pattern of usage by
signalling code is encapsulated in @code{with-simple-restart}.

Within this chapter, a parameter named @var{restarts} will accept any of
the following values:

@itemize @bullet
@item
A list of restart objects.

@item
A condition.  The procedure @code{condition/restarts} is called on the
condition, and the resulting list of restarts is used in place of the
condition.

@item
The symbol @code{bound-restarts}.  The procedure @code{bound-restarts}
is called (with no arguments), and the resulting list of restarts is
used in place of the symbol.

@item
If the @var{restarts} parameter is optional and is not supplied, it is
equivalent to having specified the symbol @code{bound-restarts}.
@end itemize

@menu
* Establishing Restart Code::   
* Invoking Standard Restart Code::  
* Finding and Invoking General Restart Code::  
* The Named Restart Abstraction::  
@end menu

@node Establishing Restart Code, Invoking Standard Restart Code, Restarts, Restarts
@subsection Establishing Restart Code

@deffn procedure with-simple-restart name reporter thunk
Invokes @var{thunk} in a dynamic environment created by adding a restart
named @var{name} to the existing named restarts.  @var{Reporter} may be
used during the execution of @var{thunk} to produce a description of the
newly created restart; it must either be a procedure of one argument (a
port) or a string.  By convention, the description generated by
@var{reporter} should be a short complete sentence, with first word
capitalized and terminated by a period.  The sentence should fit on one
line with a little room to spare (see the examples below); usually this
means that the sentence should be 70 characters or less in length.

If the restart created by @code{with-simple-restart} is invoked it
simply aborts the computation in progress by returning an unspecified
value from the call to @code{with-simple-restart}.  Otherwise
@code{with-simple-restart} returns the value computed by @var{thunk}.
@end deffn

@example
@group
(with-simple-restart 'george "This restart is named george."
  (lambda () 3)) @result{} 3
  
(with-simple-restart 'george "This restart is named george."
  (lambda ()
    (invoke-restart (find-restart 'george)))) @result{} @code{unspecific}

(with-simple-restart 'george "This restart is named george."
  (lambda () (car 3)))
;The object 3, passed as the first argument to car,
; is not the correct type.
;To continue, call RESTART with an option number:
; (RESTART 3) => Specify an argument to use in its place.
; (RESTART 2) => This restart is named george.
; (RESTART 1) => Return to read-eval-print level 1.
@end group
@end example

@deffn procedure with-restart name reporter effector interactor thunk
@findex invoke-restart
Invokes @var{thunk} in a dynamic environment created by adding a restart
named @var{name} to the existing named restarts.  @var{Reporter} may be
used during the execution of @var{thunk} to produce a description of the
newly created restart; it must either be a procedure of one argument (a
port) or a string.  @var{Effector} is a procedure which will be called
when the restart is invoked by @code{invoke-restart}.  @var{Interactor}
specifies the arguments that are to be passed to @var{effector} when it
is invoked interactively; it may be either a procedure of no arguments,
or @code{#f}.  If @var{interactor} is @code{#f}, this restart is not
meant to be invoked interactively.

The value returned by @code{with-restart} is the value returned by
@var{thunk}.  Should the restart be invoked by a condition handler,
however, the @var{effector} will not return back to the handler that
invoked it.  Instead, the @var{effector} should call a continuation
created before the condition-signalling process began, and
@code{with-restart} will therefore not return in the normal manner.
@end deffn

@example
@group
(define (by-george! thunk)
  @r{; This code handles conditions that arise while executing @var{thunk}}
  @r{; by invoking the GEORGE restart, passing 1 and 2 to the restart's}
  @r{; @var{effector} code.}
  (bind-condition-handler '() ; All conditions
   (lambda (condition)
     (invoke-restart (find-restart 'george) 1 2))
   thunk))
@end group

@group
(define (can-george! thunk)
  @r{; This code provides a way of handling errors: the GEORGE restart.}
  @r{; In order to GEORGE you must supply two values.}
  (lambda ()
    (call-with-current-continuation
     (lambda (kappa)
       (with-restart
        'george                         @r{; Name}
        "This restart is named george." @r{; Reporter}
        (lambda (a b)                   @r{; Effector}
          (kappa (list 'george a b)))
        values                          @r{; Interactor}
        thunk)))))                      @r{; Thunk}
@end group

@group
(by-george! (can-george! (lambda () -3))        @result{} -3
(by-george! (can-george! (lambda () (car 'x)))) @result{} (george 1 2)
@end group
@end example

@node Invoking Standard Restart Code, Finding and Invoking General Restart Code, Establishing Restart Code, Restarts
@subsection Invoking Standard Restart Code

Scheme supports six standard protocols for restarting from a condition,
each encapsulated using a named restart (for use by condition-signalling
code) and a simple procedure (for use by condition-handling code).
Unless otherwise specified, if one of these procedures is unable to find
its corresponding restart, it returns immediately with an unspecified
value.

Each of these procedures accepts an optional argument @var{restarts},
which is described above in @ref{Restarts}.

@deffn procedure abort [restarts]
@cindex REP loop
Abort the computation, using the restart named @code{abort}.  The
corresponding effector takes no arguments and abandons the current line
of computation.  This is the restart provided by Scheme's @sc{repl}.

@vindex condition-type:no-such-restart
If there is no restart named @code{abort}, this procedure signals an
error of type @code{condition-type:no-such-restart}.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure continue [restarts]
Continue the current computation, using the restart named
@code{continue}.  The corresponding effector takes no arguments and
continues the computation beyond the point at which the condition was
signalled.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure muffle-warning [restarts]
@findex warn
Continue the current computation, using the restart named
@code{muffle-warning}.  The corresponding effector takes no arguments
and continues the computation beyond the point at which any warning
message resulting from the condition would be presented to the user.
The procedure @code{warn} establishes a @code{muffle-warning} restart
for this purpose.

@vindex condition-type:no-such-restart
If there is no restart named @code{muffle-warning}, this procedure
signals an error of type @code{condition-type:no-such-restart}.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure retry [restarts]
Retry the current computation, using the restart named @code{retry}.
The corresponding effector takes no arguments and simply retries the
same computation that triggered the condition.  The condition may
reoccur, of course, if the root cause has not been eliminated.  The code
that signals a ``file does not exist'' error can be expected to supply a
@code{retry} restart.  The restart would be invoked after first creating
the missing file, since the computation is then likely to succeed if it
is simply retried.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure store-value new-value [restarts]
Retry the current computation, using the restart named
@code{store-value}, after first storing @var{new-value}.  The
corresponding effector takes one argument, @var{new-value}, and stores
it away in a restart-dependent location, then retries the same
computation that triggered the condition.  The condition may reoccur, of
course, if the root cause has not been eliminated.  The code that
signals an ``unassigned variable'' error can be expected to supply a
@code{store-value} restart; this would store the value in the variable
and continue the computation.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure use-value new-value [restarts]
@findex retry
@findex store-value
Retry the current computation, using the restart named @code{use-value},
but substituting @var{new-value} for a value that previously caused a
failure.  The corresponding effector takes one argument,
@var{new-value}, and retries the same computation that triggered the
condition with the new value substituted for the failing value.  The
condition may reoccur, of course, if the new value also induces the
condition.

The code that signals an ``unassigned variable'' error can be expected
to supply a @code{use-value} restart; this would simply continue the
computation with @var{new-value} instead of the value of the variable.
Contrast this with the @code{retry} and @code{store-value} restarts.  If
the @code{retry} restart is used it will fail because the variable still
has no value.  The @code{store-value} restart could be used, but it
would alter the value of the variable, so that future references to the
variable would not be detected.
@end deffn

@node Finding and Invoking General Restart Code, The Named Restart Abstraction, Invoking Standard Restart Code, Restarts
@subsection Finding and Invoking General Restart Code

@findex with-restart
@findex with-simple-restart
@findex bound-restart
@findex find-restart
@findex invoke-restart
@findex invoke-restart-interactively
Restarts are a general mechanism for establishing a protocol between
condition-signalling and condition-handling code.  The Scheme error
system provides ``packaging'' for a number of common protocols.  It also
provides lower-level hooks that are intended for implementing customized
protocols.  The mechanism used by signalling code (@code{with-restart}
and @code{with-simple-restart}) is used for both purposes.

Four additional operations are provided for the use of
condition-handling code.  Two operations (@code{bound-restarts} and
@code{find-restart}) allow condition-handling code to locate active
restarts.  The other two operations (@code{invoke-restart} and
@code{invoke-restart-interactively}) allow restart effectors to be
invoked once the restart object has been located.

In addition, there is a data abstraction that provides access to the
information encapsulated in restart objects.

@deffn procedure bound-restarts
Returns a list of all currently active restart objects, most recently
installed first.  @code{bound-restarts} should be used with caution by
condition-handling code, since it reveals all restarts that are active
at the time it is called, rather than at the time the condition was
signalled.  It is useful, however, for collecting the list of restarts
for inclusion in newly generated condition objects or for inspecting the
current state of the system.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure find-restart name [restarts]
Returns the first restart object named @var{name} in the list of
@var{restarts} (permissible values for @var{restarts} are described
above in @ref{Restarts}).  When used in a condition handler,
@code{find-restart} is usually passed the name of a particular restart
@emph{and} the condition object that has been signalled.  In this way
the handler finds only restarts that were available when the condition
was created (usually the same as when it was signalled).  If
@var{restarts} is omitted, the currently active restarts would be used,
and these often include restarts added after the condition ocurred.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure invoke-restart restart argument @dots{}
@findex invoke-restart-interactively
Calls the restart effector encapsulated in @var{restart}, passing the
specified @var{argument}s to it.  @code{invoke-restart} is intended for
use by condition-handling code that understands the protocol implemented
by @var{restart}, and can therefore calculate and pass an appropriate
set of arguments.

If a condition handler needs to interact with a user to gather the
arguments for an effector (e.g.@: if it does not understand the protocol
implemented by @var{restart}) @code{invoke-restart-interactively} should
be used instead of @code{invoke-restart}.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure invoke-restart-interactively restart
First calls the interactor encapsulated in @var{restart} to
interactively gather the arguments needed for @var{restart}'s effector.
It then calls the effector, passing these arguments to it.

@findex restart/interactor
@code{invoke-restart-interactively} is intended for calling interactive
restarts (those for which @code{restart/interactor} is not @code{#f}).
For convenience, @code{invoke-restart-interactively} will call the
restart's effector with no arguments if the restart has no interactor;
this behavior may change in the future.
@end deffn

@node The Named Restart Abstraction,  , Finding and Invoking General Restart Code, Restarts
@subsection The Named Restart Abstraction

A restart object is very simple, since it encapsulates only a name,
effector, interactor, and description.

@deffn procedure restart? object
Returns @code{#f} if and only if @var{object} is not a restart.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure restart/name restart
@findex eq?
Returns the name of @var{restart}.  While the Scheme error system uses
only symbols and the object @code{#f} for its predefined names, programs
may use arbitrary objects (name equivalence is tested using @code{eq?}).
@end deffn

@deffn procedure restart/effector restart
@findex invoke-restart
@findex invoke-restart-interactively
Returns the effector encapsulated in @var{restart}.  Normally this
procedure is not used since @code{invoke-restart} and
@code{invoke-restart-interactively} capture the most common invocation
patterns.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure restart/interactor restart
@findex invoke-restart-interactively
Returns the interactor encapsulated in @var{restart}.  This is either a
procedure of no arguments or the object @code{#f}.  Normally this
procedure is not used since @code{invoke-restart-interactively} captures
the most common usage.  Thus @code{restart/interactor} is most useful as
a predicate to determine if @var{restart} is intended to be invoked
interactively.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure write-restart-report restart port
Writes a description of @var{restart} to @var{port}.  This works by
either displaying (if it is a string) or calling (if it is a procedure)
the @var{reporter} that was supplied when the restart was created.
@end deffn

@node Condition Instances, Condition Types, Restarts, Error System
@section Condition Instances

@cindex condition (defn)
@cindex condition instance (defn)
@cindex instance, of condition (defn)
A @dfn{condition}, in addition to the information associated with its
type, usually contains other information that is not shared with other
conditions of the same type.  For example, the condition type associated
with ``unbound variable'' errors does not specify the name of the
variable that was unbound.  The additional information is captured in a
@dfn{condition} object, also called a @dfn{condition instance}.

In addition to information that is specific to a given type of condition
(such as the variable name for ``unbound variable'' conditions), every
condition instance also contains a continuation that encapsulates the
state of the computation in which the condition occurred.  This
continuation is used for analyzing the computation to learn more about
the context in which the condition occurred. It is @emph{not} intended
to provide a mechanism for continuing the computation; that mechanism is
provided by restarts.

@menu
* Generating Operations on Conditions::  
* Condition State::             
* Simple Condition Instance Operations::  
@end menu

@node Generating Operations on Conditions, Condition State, Condition Instances, Condition Instances
@subsection Generating Operations on Conditions

@findex condition-constructor
@findex condition-accessor
@findex condition-signaller
@findex condition-predicate
Scheme provides four procedures that take a condition type as input and
produce operations on the corresponding condition object.  These are
reminiscent of the operations on record types that produce record
operators (@pxref{Records}).  Given a condition type it is possible to
generate: a constructor for instances of the type (using
@code{condition-constructor}); an accessor to extract the contents of a
field in instances of the type (using @code{condition-accessor}); a
predicate to test for instances of the type (using
@code{condition-predicate}); and a procedure to create and signal an
instance of the type (using @code{condition-signaller}).

Notice that the creation of a condition object is distinct from
signalling an occurrence of the condition.  Condition objects are
first-class; they may be created and never signalled, or they may be
signalled more than once.  Further notice that there are no procedures
for modifying conditions; once created, a condition cannot be altered.

@deffn procedure condition-constructor condition-type field-names
@findex condition/restarts
@cindex bound-restarts
@cindex restarts, bound
Returns a constructor procedure that takes as arguments values for the
fields specified in @var{field-names} and creates a condition of type
@var{condition-type}.  @var{Field-names} must be a list of symbols that
is a subset of the @var{field-names} in @var{condition-type}.  The
constructor procedure returned by @code{condition-constructor} has
signature

@example
(lambda (@var{continuation} @var{restarts} . @var{field-values}) @dots{})
@end example

@noindent
where the @var{field-names} correspond to the @var{field-values}.  The
constructor argument @var{restarts} is described in @ref{Restarts}.
Conditions created by the constructor procedure have @code{#f} for the
values of all fields other than those specified by @var{field-names}.

For example, the following procedure @code{make-simple-warning}
constructs a condition of type @code{condition-type:simple-warning}
given a continuation (where the condition occurred), a description of
the restarts to be made available, a warning message, and a list of
irritants that caused the warning:

@example
@group
(define make-simple-warning
  (condition-constructor condition-type:simple-warning
                         '(message irritants)))
@end group
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn procedure condition-accessor condition-type field-name
@cindex specialization, of condition types
Returns a procedure that takes as input a condition object of type
@var{condition-type} and extracts the contents of the specified
@var{field-name}.  @code{condition-accessor} signals
@code{error:bad-range-argument} if the @var{field-name} isn't one of the
named fields of @var{condition-type}; the returned procedure will signal
@code{error:wrong-type-argument} if passed an object other than a
condition of type @var{condition-type} or one of its specializations.

@findex access-condition
If it is known in advance that a particular field of a condition will be
accessed repeatedly it is worth constructing an accessor for the field
using @code{condition-accessor} rather than using the (possibly more
convenient, but slower) @code{access-condition} procedure.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure condition-predicate condition-type
@cindex specialization, of condition types
Returns a predicate procedure for testing whether an object is a
condition of type @var{condition-type} or one of its specializations
(there is no predefined way to test for a condition of a given type but
@emph{not} a specialization of that type).
@end deffn

@deffn procedure condition-signaller condition-type field-names default-handler
Returns a signalling procedure with parameters @var{field-names}.  When
the signalling procedure is called it creates and signals a condition of
type @var{condition-type}.  If the condition isn't handled (i.e.@: if no
handler is invoked that causes an escape from the current continuation)
the signalling procedure reduces to a call to @var{default-handler} with
the condition as its argument.

There are several standard procedures that are conventionally used for
@var{default-handler}.  If @var{condition-type} is a specialization of
@code{condition-type:error}, @var{default-handler} should be the
procedure@* @code{standard-error-handler}.  If @var{condition-type} is a
specialization of @code{condition-type:warning}, @var{default-handler}
should be the procedure @code{standard-warning-handler}.  If
@var{condition-type} is a specialization of
@code{condition-type:breakpoint}, @var{default-handler} should be the
procedure @code{standard-breakpoint-handler}.
@end deffn

@node Condition State, Simple Condition Instance Operations, Generating Operations on Conditions, Condition Instances
@subsection Condition Abstraction

The condition data type is abstracted through a predicate
@code{condition?} and a set of accessor procedures.

@deffn procedure condition? object
Returns @code{#f} if and only if @var{object} is not a condition.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure condition/type condition
Returns the condition type of which @var{condition} is an instance.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure condition/error? condition
@vindex condition-type:error
@cindex specialization, of condition types
Returns @code{#t} if the @var{condition} is an instance of condition
type @code{condition-type:error} or a specialization of it, @code{#f}
otherwise.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure condition/restarts condition
Returns the list of restarts specified when @var{condition} was created.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure condition/continuation condition
Returns the continuation specified when @var{condition} was created.
This is provided for inspecting the state of the system when the
condition occurred, @emph{not} for continuing or restarting the
computation.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure write-condition-report condition port
Writes a description of @var{condition} to @var{port}, using the
reporter function from the condition type associated with
@var{condition}.  See also @code{condition/report-string}.
@end deffn

@node Simple Condition Instance Operations,  , Condition State, Condition Instances
@subsection Simple Operations on Condition Instances

The simple procedures described in this section are built on top of the
more detailed abstraction of condition objects described above.  While
these procedures are sometimes easier to use, they are often less
efficient.

@deffn procedure make-condition condition-type continuation restarts field-plist
@findex condition/restarts
@cindex bound-restarts
@cindex restarts, bound
Create a new condition object as an instance of @var{condition-type},
associated with @var{continuation}.  The @var{continuation} is provided
for inspection purposes only, @emph{not} for restarting the computation.
The @var{restarts} argument is described in @ref{Restarts}.  The
@var{field-plist} is an alternating list of field names and values for
those fields, where the field names are those that would be returned by
@code{(condition-type/field-names @var{condition-type})}.  It is used to
provide values for fields in the condition object; fields with no value
specified are set to @code{#f}.  Once a condition object has been
created there is no way to alter the values of these fields.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure access-condition condition field-name
@findex condition-accessor
Returns the value stored in the field @var{field-name} within
@var{condition}.  @var{Field-name} must be one of the names returned by
@code{(condition-type/field-names (condition/type @var{condition}))}.
@code{access-condition} looks up the @var{field-name} at runtime, so it
is more efficient to use @code{condition-accessor} to create an access
function if the same field is to be extracted from several instances of
the same condition type.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure condition/report-string condition
@findex write-condition-report
Returns a string containing a report of the @var{condition}.  This is
generated by calling @code{write-condition-report} on @var{condition}
and a string output port, and returning the output collected by the port
as a string.
@end deffn

@node Condition Types, Taxonomy, Condition Instances, Error System
@section Condition Types

@cindex condition type
@cindex type, of condition
Each condition has a @dfn{condition type} object associated with it.
These objects are used as a means of focusing on related classes of
conditions, first by concentrating all of the information about a
specific class of condition in a single place, and second by specifying
an inheritance relationship between types.  This inheritance
relationship forms the taxonomic structure of the condition hierarchy
(@pxref{Taxonomy}).

The following procedures consititute the abstraction for condition
types.

@deffn procedure make-condition-type name generalization field-names reporter
@cindex generalization, of condition types
Creates and returns a (new) condition type that is a specialization of
@var{generalization} (if it is a condition type) or is the root of a new
tree of condition types (if @var{generalization} is @code{#f}).  For
debugging purposes, the condition type has a @var{name}, and instances
of this type contain storage for the fields specified by
@var{field-names} (a list of symbols) in addition to the fields common
to all conditions (@var{type}, @var{continuation} and @var{restarts}).

@var{Reporter} is used to produce a description of a particular
condition of this type.  It may be a string describing the condition, a
procedure of arity two (the first argument will be a condition of this
type and the second a port) that will @code{write} the message to the
given port, or @code{#f} to specify that the reporter should be taken
from the condition type @var{generalization} (or produce an
``undocumented condition of type @dots{}'' message if @var{generalization}
is @code{#f}).  The conventions used to form descriptions are spelled
out in @ref{Error Messages}.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure condition-type/error? condition-type
@vindex condition-type:error
@cindex specialization, of condition types
Returns @code{#t} if the @var{condition-type} is
@code{condition-type:error} or a specialization of it, @code{#f}
otherwise.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure condition-type/field-names condition-type
@cindex generalization, of condition types
Returns a list of all of the field names for a condition of type
@var{condition-type}.  This is the set union of the fields specified
when this @var{condition-type} was created with the
@code{condition-type/field-names} of the generalization of this
@var{condition-type}.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure condition-type/generalizations condition-type
@cindex generalization, of condition types
Returns a list of all of the generalizations of @var{condition-type}.
Notice that every condition type is considered a generalization of
itself.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure condition-type? object
Returns @code{#f} if and only if @var{object} is not a condition type.
@end deffn

@node Taxonomy,  , Condition Types, Error System
@section Condition-Type Taxonomy

The MIT/GNU Scheme error system provides a rich set of predefined condition
types.  These are organized into a forest through taxonomic links
providing the relationships for ``specializes'' and ``generalizes''.
The chart appearing below shows these relationships by indenting all the
specializations of a given type relative to the type.  Note that the
variables that are bound to these condition types are prefixed by
@samp{condition-type:}; for example, the type appearing in the following
table as @samp{simple-error} is stored in the variable
@code{condition-type:simple-error}.  Users are encouraged to add new
condition types by creating specializations of existing ones.

Following the chart are detailed descriptions of the predefined
condition types.  Some of these types are marked as @dfn{abstract}
types.  Abstract types are not intended to be used directly as the type
of a condition; they are to be used as generalizations of other types,
and for binding condition handlers.  Types that are not marked as
abstract are @dfn{concrete}; they are intended to be explicitly used as
a condition's type.

@page
@example
@group
serious-condition 
    error 
        simple-error
        illegal-datum
            wrong-type-datum
                wrong-type-argument
                wrong-number-of-arguments
            datum-out-of-range 
                bad-range-argument
            inapplicable-object
        file-error
            file-operation-error
            derived-file-error
        port-error
            derived-port-error
        variable-error
            unbound-variable
            unassigned-variable
        arithmetic-error
            divide-by-zero
            floating-point-overflow
            floating-point-underflow
        control-error
            no-such-restart
        not-loading 
        primitive-procedure-error
            system-call-error
warning
    simple-warning
simple-condition
breakpoint
@end group
@end example

@deffn {condition type} condition-type:serious-condition 
This is an abstract type.  All serious conditions that require some form
of intervention should inherit from this type.  In particular, all
errors inherit from this type.
@end deffn

@deffn {condition type} condition-type:error 
This is an abstract type.  All errors should inherit from this type.
@end deffn

@deffn {condition type} condition-type:simple-error message irritants
This is the condition generated by the @code{error} procedure when its
first argument is not a condition or condition type.  The fields
@var{message} and @var{irritants} are taken directly from the arguments
to @code{error}; @var{message} contains an object (usually a string) and
@var{irritants} contains a list of objects.  The reporter for this type
uses @code{format-error-message} to generate its output from
@var{message} and @var{irritants}.
@end deffn

@deffn {condition type} condition-type:illegal-datum datum
This is an abstract type.  This type indicates the class of errors in
which a program discovers an object that lacks specific required
properties.  Most commonly, the object is of the wrong type or is
outside a specific range.  The @var{datum} field contains the offending
object.
@end deffn

@deffn {condition type} condition-type:wrong-type-datum datum type
This type indicates the class of errors in which a program discovers an
object that is of the wrong type.  The @var{type} field contains a
string describing the type that was expected, and the @var{datum} field
contains the object that is of the wrong type.
@end deffn

@example
@group
(error:wrong-type-datum 3.4 "integer")  @error{}
;The object 3.4 is not an integer.
;To continue, call RESTART with an option number:
; (RESTART 1) => Return to read-eval-print level 1.
@end group
@end example

@deffn procedure error:wrong-type-datum datum type
This procedure signals a condition of type
@code{condition-type:wrong-type-datum}.  The @var{datum} and @var{type}
fields of the condition are filled in from the corresponding arguments
to the procedure.
@end deffn

@deffn {condition type} condition-type:wrong-type-argument datum type operator operand
This type indicates that a procedure was passed an argument of the wrong
type.  The @var{operator} field contains the procedure (or a symbol
naming the procedure), the @var{operand} field indicates the argument
position that was involved (this field contains either a symbol, a
non-negative integer, or @code{#f}), the @var{type} field contains a
string describing the type that was expected, and the @var{datum} field
contains the offending argument.
@end deffn

@example
@group
(+ 'a 3)                                @error{}
;The object a, passed as the first argument to integer-add,
; is not the correct type.
;To continue, call RESTART with an option number:
; (RESTART 2) => Specify an argument to use in its place.
; (RESTART 1) => Return to read-eval-print level 1.
@end group

@group
(list-copy 3)
;The object 3, passed as an argument to list-copy, is not a list.
;To continue, call RESTART with an option number:
; (RESTART 1) => Return to read-eval-print level 1.
@end group
@end example

@deffn procedure error:wrong-type-argument datum type operator
This procedure signals a condition of type
@code{condition-type:wrong-type-argument}.  The @var{datum}, @var{type}
and @var{operator} fields of the condition are filled in from the
corresponding arguments to the procedure; the @var{operand} field of the
condition is set to @code{#f}.
@end deffn

@deffn {condition type} condition-type:wrong-number-of-arguments datum type operands
This type indicates that a procedure was called with the wrong number of
arguments.  The @var{datum} field contains the procedure being called,
the @var{type} field contains the number of arguments that the procedure
accepts, and the @var{operands} field contains a list of the arguments
that were passed to the procedure.
@end deffn

@example
@group
(car 3 4)                               @error{}
;The procedure car has been called with 2 arguments;
; it requires exactly 1 argument.
;To continue, call RESTART with an option number:
; (RESTART 1) => Return to read-eval-print level 1.
@end group
@end example

@deffn procedure error:wrong-number-of-arguments datum type operands
This procedure signals a condition of type
@code{condition-type:wrong-number-of-arguments}.  The @var{datum},
@var{type} and @var{operands} fields of the condition are filled in from
the corresponding arguments to the procedure.
@end deffn

@deffn {condition type} condition-type:datum-out-of-range datum
This type indicates the class of errors in which a program discovers an
object that is of the correct type but is otherwise out of range.  Most
often, this type indicates that an index to some data structure is
outside of the range of indices for that structure.  The @var{datum}
field contains the offending object.
@end deffn

@example
@group
(error:datum-out-of-range 3)            @error{}
;The object 3 is not in the correct range.
;To continue, call RESTART with an option number:
; (RESTART 1) => Return to read-eval-print level 1.
@end group
@end example

@deffn procedure error:datum-out-of-range datum
This procedure signals a condition of type
@code{condition-type:datum-out-of-range}.  The @var{datum} field of the
condition is filled in from the corresponding argument to the procedure.
@end deffn

@deffn {condition type} condition-type:bad-range-argument datum operator operand
This type indicates that a procedure was passed an argument that is of
the correct type but is otherwise out of range.  Most often, this type
indicates that an index to some data structure is outside of the range
of indices for that structure.  The @var{operator} field contains the
procedure (or a symbol naming the procedure), the @var{operand} field
indicates the argument position that was involved (this field contains
either a symbol, a non-negative integer, or @code{#f}), and the
@var{datum} field is the offending argument.
@end deffn

@example
@group
(string-ref "abc" 3)                    @error{}
;The object 3, passed as the second argument to string-ref,
; is not in the correct range.
;To continue, call RESTART with an option number:
; (RESTART 2) => Specify an argument to use in its place.
; (RESTART 1) => Return to read-eval-print level 1.
@end group
@end example

@deffn procedure error:bad-range-argument datum operator
This procedure signals a condition of type
@code{condition-type:bad-range-argument}.  The @var{datum} and
@var{operator} fields of the condition are filled in from the
corresponding arguments to the procedure; the @var{operand} field of the
condition is set to @code{#f}.
@end deffn

@deffn {condition type} condition-type:inapplicable-object datum operands
This type indicates an error in which a program attempted to apply an
object that is not a procedure.  The object being applied is saved in
the @var{datum} field, and the arguments being passed to the object are
saved as a list in the @var{operands} field.
@end deffn

@example
@group
(3 4)                                   @error{}
;The object 3 is not applicable.
;To continue, call RESTART with an option number:
; (RESTART 2) => Specify a procedure to use in its place.
; (RESTART 1) => Return to read-eval-print level 1.
@end group
@end example

@deffn {condition type} condition-type:file-error filename
This is an abstract type.  It indicates that an error associated with a
file has occurred.  For example, attempting to delete a nonexistent file
will signal an error.  The @var{filename} field contains a filename or
pathname associated with the operation that failed.
@end deffn

@deffn {condition type} condition-type:file-operation-error filename verb noun reason operator operands
This is the most common condition type for file system errors.  The
@var{filename} field contains the filename or pathname that was being
operated on.  The @var{verb} field contains a string which is the verb
or verb phrase describing the operation being performed, and the
@var{noun} field contains a string which is a noun or noun phrase
describing the object being operated on.  The @var{reason} field
contains a string describing the error that occurred.  The
@var{operator} field contains the procedure performing the operation (or
a symbol naming that procedure), and the @var{operands} field contains a
list of the arguments that were passed to that procedure.  For example,
an attempt to delete a nonexistent file would have the following field
values:

@example
@group
filename        "/zu/cph/tmp/no-such-file"
verb            "delete"
noun            "file"
reason          "no such file or directory"
operator        file-remove
operands        ("/zu/cph/tmp/no-such-file")
@end group
@end example

@noindent
and would generate a message like this:

@example
@group
(delete-file "/zu/cph/tmp/no-such-file") @error{}
;Unable to delete file "/zu/cph/tmp/no-such-file" because:
; No such file or directory.
;To continue, call RESTART with an option number:
; (RESTART 3) => Try to delete the same file again.
; (RESTART 2) => Try to delete a different file.
; (RESTART 1) => Return to read-eval-print level 1.
@end group
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn procedure error:file-operation-error filename verb noun reason operator operands
This procedure signals a condition of type
@code{condition-type:file-operation-error}.  The fields of the condition
are filled in from the corresponding arguments to the procedure.
@end deffn

@deffn {condition type} condition-type:derived-file-error filename condition
This is another kind of file error, which is generated by obscure
file-system errors that do not fit into the standard categories.  The
@var{filename} field contains the filename or pathname that was being
operated on, and the @var{condition} field contains a condition
describing the error in more detail.  Usually the @var{condition} field
contains a condition of type @code{condition-type:system-call-error}.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure error:derived-file filename condition
This procedure signals a condition of type
@code{condition-type:derived-file-error}.  The @var{filename} and
@var{condition} fields of the condition are filled in from the
corresponding arguments to the procedure.
@end deffn

@deffn {condition type} condition-type:port-error port
This is an abstract type.  It indicates that an error associated with a
I/O port has occurred.  For example, writing output to a file port can
signal an error if the disk containing the file is full; that error
would be signalled as a port error.  The @var{port} field contains the
associated port.
@end deffn

@deffn {condition type} condition-type:derived-port-error port condition
This is a concrete type that is signalled when port errors occur.  The
@var{port} field contains the port associated with the error, and the
@var{condition} field contains a condition object that describes the
error in more detail.  Usually the @var{condition} field contains a
condition of type @code{condition-type:system-call-error}.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure error:derived-port port condition
This procedure signals a condition of type
@code{condition-type:derived-port-error}.  The @var{port} and
@var{condition} fields of the condition are filled in from the
corresponding arguments to the procedure.
@end deffn

@deffn {condition type} condition-type:variable-error location environment
This is an abstract type.  It indicates that an error associated with a
variable has occurred.  The @var{location} field contains the name of
the variable, and the @var{environment} field contains the environment
in which the variable was referenced.
@end deffn

@deffn {condition type} condition-type:unbound-variable location environment
This type is generated when a program attempts to access or modify a
variable that is not bound.  The @var{location} field contains the name
of the variable, and the @var{environment} field contains the
environment in which the reference occurred.
@end deffn

@example
@group
foo                                     @error{}
;Unbound variable: foo
;To continue, call RESTART with an option number:
; (RESTART 3) => Specify a value to use instead of foo.
; (RESTART 2) => Define foo to a given value.
; (RESTART 1) => Return to read-eval-print level 1.
@end group
@end example

@deffn {condition type} condition-type:unassigned-variable location environment
This type is generated when a program attempts to access a variable that
is not assigned.  The @var{location} field contains the name of the
variable, and the @var{environment} field contains the environment in
which the reference occurred.
@end deffn

@example
@group
foo                                     @error{}
;Unassigned variable: foo
;To continue, call RESTART with an option number:
; (RESTART 3) => Specify a value to use instead of foo.
; (RESTART 2) => Set foo to a given value.
; (RESTART 1) => Return to read-eval-print level 1.
@end group
@end example

@deffn {condition type} condition-type:arithmetic-error operator operands
This is an abstract type.  It indicates that a numerical operation was
unable to complete because of an arithmetic error.  (For example,
division by zero.)  The @var{operator} field contains the procedure that
implements the operation (or a symbol naming the procedure), and the
@var{operands} field contains a list of the arguments that were passed
to the procedure.
@end deffn

@deffn {condition type} condition-type:divide-by-zero operator operands
This type is generated when a program attempts to divide by zero.  The
@var{operator} field contains the procedure that implements the failing
operation (or a symbol naming the procedure), and the @var{operands}
field contains a list of the arguments that were passed to the
procedure.
@end deffn

@example
@group
(/ 1 0)
;Division by zero signalled by /.
;To continue, call RESTART with an option number:
; (RESTART 1) => Return to read-eval-print level 1.
@end group
@end example

@deffn procedure error:divide-by-zero operator operands
This procedure signals a condition of type
@code{condition-type:divide-by-zero}.  The @var{operator} and
@var{operands} fields of the condition are filled in from the
corresponding arguments to the procedure.
@end deffn

@deffn {condition type} condition-type:floating-point-overflow operator operands
This type is generated when a program performs an arithmetic operation
that results in a floating-point overflow.  The @var{operator} field
contains the procedure that implements the operation (or a symbol naming
the procedure), and the @var{operands} field contains a list of the
arguments that were passed to the procedure.
@end deffn

@deffn {condition type} condition-type:floating-point-underflow operator operands
This type is generated when a program performs an arithmetic operation
that results in a floating-point underflow.  The @var{operator} field
contains the procedure that implements the operation (or a symbol naming
the procedure), and the @var{operands} field contains a list of the
arguments that were passed to the procedure.
@end deffn

@deffn {condition type} condition-type:primitive-procedure-error operator operands
This is an abstract type.  It indicates that an error was generated by a
primitive procedure call.  Primitive procedures are distinguished from
ordinary procedures in that they are not written in Scheme but instead
in the underlying language of the Scheme implementation.  The
@var{operator} field contains the procedure that implements the
operation (or a symbol naming the procedure), and the @var{operands}
field contains a list of the arguments that were passed to the
procedure.
@end deffn

@deffn {condition type} condition-type:system-call-error operator operands system-call error-type
This is the most common condition type generated by primitive
procedures.  A condition of this type indicates that the primitive made
a system call to the operating system, and that the system call
signalled an error.  The system-call error is reflected back to Scheme
as a condition of this type, except that many common system-call errors
are automatically translated by the Scheme implementation into more
useful forms; for example, a system-call error that occurs while trying
to delete a file will be translated into a condition of type
@code{condition-type:file-operation-error}.  The @var{operator} field
contains the procedure that implements the operation (or a symbol naming
the procedure), and the @var{operands} field contains a list of the
arguments that were passed to the procedure.  The @var{system-call} and
@var{error-type} fields contain symbols that describe the specific
system call that was being made and the error that occurred,
respectively; these symbols are completely operating-system dependent.
@end deffn

@deffn {condition type} condition-type:control-error 
This is an abstract type.  It describes a class of errors relating to
program control flow.
@end deffn

@deffn {condition type} condition-type:no-such-restart name
This type indicates that a named restart was not active when it was
expected to be.  Conditions of this type are signalled by several
procedures that look for particular named restarts, for example
@code{muffle-warning}.  The @var{name} field contains the name that was
being searched for.
@end deffn

@example
@group
(muffle-warning)                        @error{}
;The restart named muffle-warning is not bound.
;To continue, call RESTART with an option number:
; (RESTART 1) => Return to read-eval-print level 1.
@end group
@end example

@deffn procedure error:no-such-restart name
This procedure signals a condition of type
@code{condition-type:no-such-restart}.  The @var{name} field of the
condition is filled in from the corresponding argument to the procedure.
@end deffn

@deffn {condition type} condition-type:not-loading
A condition of this type is generated when the procedure
@code{current-load-pathname} is called from somewhere other than inside
a file being loaded.
@end deffn

@example
@group
(current-load-pathname)                 @error{}
;No file being loaded.
;To continue, call RESTART with an option number:
; (RESTART 1) => Return to read-eval-print level 1.
@end group
@end example

@deffn {condition type} condition-type:warning
This is an abstract type.  All warnings should inherit from this type.
Warnings are a class of conditions that are usually handled by informing
the user of the condition and proceeding the computation normally.
@end deffn

@deffn {condition type} condition-type:simple-warning message irritants
This is the condition generated by the @code{warn} procedure.  The
fields @var{message} and @var{irritants} are taken directly from the
arguments to @code{warn}; @var{message} contains an object (usually a
string) and @var{irritants} contains a list of objects.  The reporter
for this type uses @code{format-error-message} to generate its output
from @var{message} and @var{irritants}.
@end deffn

@deffn {condition type} condition-type:simple-condition message irritants
This is an unspecialized condition that does not fall into any of the
standard condition classes.  The @var{message} field contains an object
(usually a string) and @var{irritants} contains a list of objects.  The
reporter for this type uses @code{format-error-message} to generate its
output from @var{message} and @var{irritants}.
@end deffn

@deffn {condition type} condition-type:breakpoint environment message prompt
A condition of this type is generated by the breakpoint mechanism.  The
contents of its fields are beyond the scope of this document.
@end deffn
