@c This file is part of the MIT/GNU Scheme Reference Manual.
@c $Id$

@c Copyright (C) 1986, 1987, 1988, 1989, 1990, 1991, 1992, 1993, 1994,
@c     1995, 1996, 1997, 1998, 1999, 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004,
@c     2005, 2006, 2007, 2008 Massachusetts Institute of Technology
@c See file scheme.texinfo for copying conditions.

@node Graphics, Win32 Package Reference, Error System, Top
@chapter Graphics
@cindex graphics

MIT/GNU Scheme has a simple two-dimensional line-graphics interface
that is suitable for many graphics applications.  In particular it is
often used for plotting data points from experiments.  The interface is
generic in that it can support different types of graphics devices in a
uniform manner.  At the present time only one type of graphics device
is implemented on each operating system.

Procedures are available for drawing points, lines, and text; defining
the coordinate system; clipping graphics output; controlling some of the
drawing characteristics; and controlling the output buffer (for devices
that perform buffering).  Additionally, devices may support custom
operations, such as control of colors.

There are some constraints on the arguments to the procedures described
in this chapter.  Any argument named @var{graphics-device} must be a
graphics device object that was returned from a call to
@code{make-graphics-device}.  Any argument that is a coordinate must be
either an exact integer or an inexact real.

@menu
* Opening and Closing of Graphics Devices::  
* Coordinates for Graphics::    
* Drawing Graphics::            
* Characteristics of Graphics Output::  
* Buffering of Graphics Output::  
* Clipping of Graphics Output::  
* Custom Graphics Operations::  
* Images::                      
* X Graphics::                  Graphics on the X Window System
* Win32 Graphics::              Graphics on Microsoft Windows and Windows NT
* OS/2 Graphics::               Graphics on IBM OS/2
@end menu

@node Opening and Closing of Graphics Devices, Coordinates for Graphics, Graphics, Graphics
@section Opening and Closing of Graphics Devices
@cindex graphics, opening and closing devices

@deffn procedure graphics-type-available? graphics-device-type
This predicate returns @code{#t} if the graphics system named by the
symbol @var{graphics-device-type} is implemented by the Scheme system.
Otherwise it returns @code{#f}, in which case it is an error to attempt
to make a graphics device using @var{graphics-device-type}.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure enumerate-graphics-types
This procedure returns a list of symbols which are the names of all the
graphics device types that are supported by the Scheme system.  The
result is useful in deciding what additional arguments to supply to
@code{make-graphics-device}, as each device type typically has a unique
way of specifying the initial size, shape and other attributes.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure make-graphics-device graphics-device-type object @dots{}
This operation creates and returns a graphics device object.
@var{Graphics-device-type} is a symbol naming a graphics device type,
and both the number and the meaning of the remaining arguments is
determined by that type (see the description of each device type for
details); @var{graphics-device-type} must satisfy
@code{graphics-type-available?}.  @var{Graphics-device-type} may also be
@code{#f}, in which case the graphics device type is chosen by the
system from what is available.  This allows completely portable graphics
programs to be written provided no custom graphics operations are used.
When @var{graphics-device-type} is @code{#f} no further arguments may be
given; each graphics device type will use some ``sensible'' defaults.
If more control is required then the program should use one of the two
procedures above to dispatch on the available types.

This procedure opens and initializes the device, which remains valid
until explicitly closed by the procedure @code{graphics-close}.
Depending on the implementation of the graphics device, if this object
is reclaimed by the garbage collector, the graphics device may remain
open or it may be automatically closed.  While a graphics device remains
open the resources associated with it are not released.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure graphics-close graphics-device
Closes @var{graphics-device}, releasing its resources.  Subsequently it
is an error to use @var{graphics-device}.
@end deffn

@node Coordinates for Graphics, Drawing Graphics, Opening and Closing of Graphics Devices, Graphics
@section Coordinates for Graphics
@cindex graphics, coordinate systems

@cindex coordinates, graphics
@cindex device coordinates, graphics (defn)
@cindex graphics, device coordinates (defn)
@cindex virtual coordinates, graphics (defn)
@cindex graphics, virtual coordinates (defn)
Each graphics device has two different coordinate systems associated
with it: @dfn{device coordinates} and @dfn{virtual coordinates}.  Device
coordinates are generally defined by low-level characteristics of the
device itself, and often cannot be changed.  Most device coordinate
systems are defined in terms of pixels, and usually the upper-left-hand
corner is the origin of the coordinate system, with @var{x} coordinates
increasing to the right and @var{y} coordinates increasing downwards.

In contrast, virtual coordinates are more flexible in the units
employed, the position of the origin, and even the direction in which
the coordinates increase.  A virtual coordinate system is defined by
assigning coordinates to the edges of a device.  Because these edge
coordinates are arbitrary real numbers, any Cartesian coordinate system
can be defined.

All graphics procedures that use coordinates are defined on virtual
coordinates.  For example, to draw a line at a particular place on a
device, the virtual coordinates for the endpoints of that line are
given.

When a graphics device is initialized, its virtual coordinate system is
reset so that the left edge corresponds to an x-coordinate of @code{-1},
the right edge to x-coordinate @code{1}, the bottom edge to y-coordinate
@code{-1}, and the top edge to y-coordinate @code{1}.

@deffn procedure graphics-device-coordinate-limits graphics-device
Returns (as multiple values) the device coordinate limits for
@var{graphics-device}.  The values, which are exact non-negative
integers, are: @var{x-left}, @var{y-bottom}, @var{x-right}, and
@var{y-top}.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure graphics-coordinate-limits graphics-device
Returns (as multiple values) the virtual coordinate limits for
@var{graphics-device}.  The values, which are real numbers, are:
@var{x-left}, @var{y-bottom}, @var{x-right}, and @var{y-top}.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure graphics-set-coordinate-limits graphics-device x-left y-bottom x-right y-top
Changes the virtual coordinate limits of @var{graphics-device} to the
given arguments.  @var{X-left}, @var{y-bottom}, @var{x-right}, and
@var{y-top} must be real numbers.  Subsequent calls to
@code{graphics-coordinate-limits} will return the new limits.  This
operation has no effect on the device's displayed contents.

Note: This operation usually resets the clip rectangle, although it is
not guaranteed to do so.  If a clip rectangle is in effect when this
procedure is called, it is necessary to redefine the clip rectangle
afterwards.
@end deffn

@node Drawing Graphics, Characteristics of Graphics Output, Coordinates for Graphics, Graphics
@section Drawing Graphics
@cindex graphics, drawing

The procedures in this section provide the basic drawing capabilities of
Scheme's graphics system.

@deffn procedure graphics-clear graphics-device
Clears the display of @var{graphics-device}.  Unaffected by the current
drawing mode.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure graphics-draw-point graphics-device x y
Draws a single point on @var{graphics-device} at the virtual coordinates
given by @var{x} and @var{y}, using the current drawing mode.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure graphics-erase-point graphics-device x y
Erases a single point on @var{graphics-device} at the virtual
coordinates given by @var{x} and @var{y}.  This procedure is unaffected
by the current drawing mode.
@end deffn

@noindent
This is equivalent to

@example
@group
(lambda (device x y)
  (graphics-bind-drawing-mode device 0
    (lambda ()
      (graphics-draw-point device x y))))
@end group
@end example

@deffn procedure graphics-draw-line graphics-device x-start y-start x-end y-end
@var{X-start}, @var{y-start}, @var{x-end}, and @var{y-end} must be real
numbers.  Draws a line on @var{graphics-device} that connects the points
(@var{x-start}, @var{y-start}) and (@var{x-end}, @var{y-end}).  The line
is drawn using the current drawing mode and line style.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure graphics-draw-text graphics-device x y string
Draws the characters of @var{string} at the point (@var{x}, @var{y}) on
@var{graphics-device}, using the current drawing mode.  The
characteristics of the characters drawn are device-dependent, but all
devices are initialized so that the characters are drawn upright, from
left to right, with the leftmost edge of the leftmost character at
@var{x}, and the baseline of the characters at @var{y}.
@end deffn

@cindex graphics, cursor (defn)
@cindex cursor, graphics (defn)
The following two procedures provide an alternate mechanism for drawing
lines, which is more akin to using a plotter.  They maintain a
@dfn{cursor}, which can be positioned to a particular point and then
dragged to another point, producing a line.  Sequences of connected line
segments can be drawn by dragging the cursor from point to point.

Many graphics operations have an unspecified effect on the cursor.  The
following exceptions are guaranteed to leave the cursor unaffected:

@example
@group
graphics-device-coordinate-limits
graphics-coordinate-limits
graphics-enable-buffering
graphics-disable-buffering
graphics-flush
graphics-bind-drawing-mode
graphics-set-drawing-mode
graphics-bind-line-style
graphics-set-line-style
@end group
@end example

The initial state of the cursor is unspecified.

@deffn procedure graphics-move-cursor graphics-device x y
Moves the cursor for @var{graphics-device} to the point (@var{x},
@var{y}).  The contents of the device's display are unchanged.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure graphics-drag-cursor graphics-device x y
Draws a line from @var{graphics-device}'s cursor to the point (@var{x},
@var{y}), simultaneously moving the cursor to that point.  The line is
drawn using the current drawing mode and line style.
@end deffn

@node Characteristics of Graphics Output, Buffering of Graphics Output, Drawing Graphics, Graphics
@section Characteristics of Graphics Output

@cindex graphics, output characteristics
Two characteristics of graphics output are so useful that they are
supported uniformly by all graphics devices: @dfn{drawing mode} and
@dfn{line style}.  A third characteristic, @dfn{color}, is equally
useful (if not more so), but implementation restrictions prohibit a
uniform interface.

@cindex drawing mode, graphics (defn)
@cindex graphics, drawing mode (defn)
The @dfn{drawing mode}, an exact integer in the range @code{0} to
@code{15} inclusive, determines how the figure being drawn is combined
with the background over which it is drawn to generate the final result.
Initially the drawing mode is set to ``source'', so that the new output
overwrites whatever appears in that place.  Useful alternative drawing
modes can, for example, erase what was already there, or invert it.

Altogether 16 boolean operations are available for combining the source
(what is being drawn) and the destination (what is being drawn over).
The source and destination are combined by the device on a
pixel-by-pixel basis as follows:

@example
@group
Mode    Meaning
----    -------
0       ZERO @r{[erase; use background color]}
1       source AND destination
2       source AND (NOT destination)
3       source
4       (NOT source) AND destination
5       destination
6       source XOR destination
7       source OR destination
8       NOT (source OR destination)
9       NOT (source XOR destination)
10      NOT destination
11      source OR (NOT destination)
12      NOT source
13      (NOT source) OR destination
14      (NOT source) OR (NOT destination)
15      ONE @r{[use foreground color]}
@end group
@end example

@cindex line style, graphics (defn)
@cindex graphics, line style (defn)
The @dfn{line style}, an exact integer in the range @code{0} to @code{7}
inclusive, determines which parts of a line are drawn in the foreground
color, and which in the background color.  The default line style,
``solid'', draws the entire line in the foreground color.
Alternatively, the ``dash'' style alternates between foreground and
background colors to generate a dashed line.  This capability is useful
for plotting several things on the same graph.

Here is a table showing the name and approximate pattern of the
different styles.  A @samp{1} in the pattern represents a foreground
pixel, while a @samp{-} represents a background pixel.  Note that the
precise output for each style will vary from device to device.  The only
style that is guaranteed to be the same for every device is ``solid''.

@example
@group
Style   Name                    Pattern
-----   -------                 -------
0       solid                   1111111111111111
1       dash                    11111111--------
2       dot                     1-1-1-1-1-1-1-1-
3       dash dot                1111111111111-1-
4       dash dot dot            11111111111-1-1-
5       long dash               11111111111-----
6       center dash             111111111111-11-
7       center dash dash        111111111-11-11-
@end group
@end example

@deffn procedure graphics-bind-drawing-mode graphics-device drawing-mode thunk
@deffnx procedure graphics-bind-line-style graphics-device line-style thunk
These procedures bind the drawing mode or line style, respectively, of
@var{graphics-device}, invoke the procedure @var{thunk} with no
arguments, then undo the binding when @var{thunk} returns.  The value of
each procedure is the value returned by @var{thunk}.  Graphics
operations performed during @var{thunk}'s dynamic extent will see the
newly bound mode or style as current.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure graphics-set-drawing-mode graphics-device drawing-mode
@deffnx procedure graphics-set-line-style graphics-device line-style
These procedures change the drawing mode or line style, respectively, of
@var{graphics-device}.  The mode or style will remain in effect until
subsequent changes or bindings.
@end deffn

@node Buffering of Graphics Output, Clipping of Graphics Output, Characteristics of Graphics Output, Graphics
@section Buffering of Graphics Output
@cindex buffering, of graphics output
@cindex graphics, buffering of output

To improve performance of graphics output, most graphics devices provide
some form of buffering.  By default, Scheme's graphics procedures flush
this buffer after every drawing operation.  The procedures in this
section allow the user to control the flushing of the output
buffer.

@deffn procedure graphics-enable-buffering graphics-device
Enables buffering for @var{graphics-device}.  In other words, after this
procedure is called, graphics operations are permitted to buffer their
drawing requests.  This usually means that the drawing is delayed until
the buffer is flushed explicitly by the user, or until it fills up and
is flushed by the system.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure graphics-disable-buffering graphics-device
Disables buffering for @var{graphics-device}.  By default, all graphics
devices are initialized with buffering disabled.  After this procedure
is called, all drawing operations perform their output immediately,
before returning.

Note: @code{graphics-disable-buffering} flushes the output buffer if
necessary.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure graphics-flush graphics-device
Flushes the graphics output buffer for @var{graphics-device}.  This
operation has no effect for devices that do not support buffering, or if
buffering is disabled for the device.
@end deffn

@node Clipping of Graphics Output, Custom Graphics Operations, Buffering of Graphics Output, Graphics
@section Clipping of Graphics Output
@cindex graphics, clipping
@cindex clipping, of graphics

@cindex clip rectangle, graphics (defn)
Scheme provides a rudimentary mechanism for restricting graphics output
to a given rectangular subsection of a graphics device.  By default,
graphics output that is drawn anywhere within the device's virtual
coordinate limits will appear on the device.  When a @dfn{clip
rectangle} is specified, however, output that would have appeared
outside the clip rectangle is not drawn.

Note that changing the virtual coordinate limits for a device will
usually reset the clip rectangle for that device, as will any operation
that affects the size of the device (such as a window resizing
operation).  However, programs should not depend on this.

@deffn procedure graphics-set-clip-rectangle graphics-device x-left y-bottom x-right y-top
Specifies the clip rectangle for @var{graphics-device} in virtual
coordinates.  @var{X-left}, @var{y-bottom}, @var{x-right}, and
@var{y-top} must be real numbers.  Subsequent graphics output is clipped
to the intersection of this rectangle and the device's virtual
coordinate limits.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure graphics-reset-clip-rectangle graphics-device
Eliminates the clip rectangle for @var{graphics-device}.  Subsequent
graphics output is clipped to the virtual coordinate limits of the
device.
@end deffn

@node Custom Graphics Operations, Images, Clipping of Graphics Output, Graphics
@section Custom Graphics Operations
@cindex custom operations, on graphics device
@cindex graphics, custom operations

In addition to the standard operations, a graphics device may support
@dfn{custom operations}.  For example, most devices have custom
operations to control color.  @code{graphics-operation} is used to
invoke custom operations.

@deffn procedure graphics-operation graphics-device name object @dots{}
Invokes the graphics operation on @var{graphics-device} whose name is
the symbol @var{name}, passing it the remaining arguments.  This
procedure can be used to invoke the standard operations, as well as
custom operations that are specific to a particular graphics device
type.  The names of the standard graphics operations are formed by
removing the @code{graphics-} prefix from the corresponding procedure.
For example, the following are equivalent:

@example
@group
(graphics-draw-point device x y)
(graphics-operation device 'draw-point x y)
@end group
@end example

For information on the custom operations for a particular device, see
the documentation for its type.
@end deffn

@node Images, X Graphics, Custom Graphics Operations, Graphics
@section Images
@cindex graphics, images
@cindex images, graphics
@cindex graphics, bitmaps
@cindex bitmaps, graphics

Some graphics device types support images, which are rectangular pieces
of picture that may be drawn into a graphics device.  Images are often
called something else in the host graphics system, such as bitmaps or
pixmaps.  The operations supported vary between devices, so look under
the different device types to see what operations are available.  All
devices that support images support the following operations.

@defop operation graphics-device create-image width height
Images are created using the @code{create-image} graphics operation,
specifying the @var{width} and @var{height} of the image in device
coordinates (pixels).

@example
(graphics-operation device 'create-image 200 100)
@end example

@noindent
The initial contents of an image are unspecified.

@code{create-image} is a graphics operation rather than a procedure
because the kind of image returned depends on the kind of graphics
device used and the options specified in its creation.  The image may be
used freely with other graphics devices created with the same
attributes, but the effects of using an image with a graphics device
with different attributes (for example, different colors) is undefined.
Under X, the image is display dependent.
@end defop

@defop operation graphics-device draw-image x y image
The image is copied into the graphics device at the specified position.
@end defop

@defop operation graphics-device draw-subimage x y image im-x im-y w h
Part of the image is copied into the graphics device at the specified
(@var{x}, @var{y}) position.  The part of the image that is copied is the
rectangular region at @var{im-x} and @var{im-y} and of width @var{w} and
height @var{h}.  These four numbers are given in device coordinates
(pixels).
@end defop

@deffn procedure image? object
Returns @code{#t} if @var{object} is an image, otherwise returns
@code{#f}.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure image/destroy image
This procedure destroys @var{image}, returning storage to the system.
Programs should destroy images after they have been used because even
modest images may use large amounts of memory.  Images are reclaimed by
the garbage collector, but they may be implemented using memory outside
of Scheme's heap.  If an image is reclaimed before being destroyed, the
implementation might not deallocate that non-heap memory, which can
cause a subsequent call to @code{create-image} to fail because it is
unable to allocate enough memory.
@end deffn

@c @deffn procedure image/descriptor image
@c The procedure returns the implementation dependent image.  Its use is
@c discouraged as it is non-portable.
@c @end deffn

@deffn procedure image/height image
Returns the height of the image in device coordinates.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure image/width image
Returns the width of the image in device coordinates.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure image/fill-from-byte-vector image bytes
The contents of @var{image} are set in a device-dependent way, using one
byte per pixel from @var{bytes} (a string).  Pixels are filled row by
row from the top of the image to the bottom, with each row being filled
from left to right.  There must be at least @code{(* (image/height
@var{image}) (image/width @var{image}))} bytes in @var{bytes}.
@end deffn

@node X Graphics, Win32 Graphics, Images, Graphics
@section X Graphics
@cindex X graphics

@cindex X window system
MIT/GNU Scheme supports graphics in the X window system (version 11).
Arbitrary numbers of displays may be opened, and arbitrary numbers of
graphics windows may be created for each display.  A variety of
operations is available to manipulate various aspects of the windows, to
control their size, position, colors, and mapping.  The X graphics
device type supports images, which are implemented as Xlib @code{XImage}
objects.  X display, window, and image objects are automatically closed
if they are reclaimed by the garbage collector.

@menu
* X Graphics Type::             
* Utilities for X Graphics::    
* Custom Operations on X Graphics Devices::  
@end menu

@node X Graphics Type, Utilities for X Graphics, X Graphics, X Graphics
@subsection X Graphics Type


A graphics device for X windows is created by passing the symbol
@code{x} as the graphics device type name to
@code{make-graphics-device}:

@example
(make-graphics-device 'x #!optional @var{display} @var{geometry} @var{suppress-map?})
@end example

@noindent
where @var{display} is either a display object, @code{#f}, or a string;
@var{geometry} is either @code{#f} or a string; and @var{suppress-map?}
is a boolean or a vector (see below).  A new window is created on the
appropriate display, and a graphics device representing that window is
returned.

@findex x-open-display
@var{Display} specifies which X display the window is to be opened on;
if it is @code{#f} or a string, it is passed as an argument to
@code{x-open-display}, and the value returned by that procedure is used
in place of the original argument.  @var{Geometry} is an X geometry
string, or @code{#f} which means to use the default geometry (which is
specified as a resource).

@var{Suppress-map?}, if given, may take two forms.  First, it may be a
boolean: if @code{#f} (the default), the window is automatically mapped
after it is created; otherwise, @code{#t} means to suppress this
automatic mapping.  The second form is a vector of three elements.  The
first element is a boolean with the same meaning as the boolean form of
@var{suppress-map?}.  The second element is a string, which specifies an
alternative resource name to be used for looking up the window's
resources.  The third element is also a string, which specifies a class
name for looking up the window's resources.  The default value for
@var{suppress-map?} is @code{#f}.

The default resource and class names are @code{"schemeGraphics"} and
@code{"SchemeGraphics"} respectively.

@cindex resources, X graphics
@cindex X resources, graphics
The window is initialized using the resource and class names specified
by @var{suppress-map?}, and is sensitive to the following resource
properties:

@example
@group
Property        Class           Default
--------        -----           -------
geometry        Geometry        512x384+0+0
font            Font            fixed
borderWidth     BorderWidth     2
internalBorder  BorderWidth     @r{[border width]}
background      Background      white
foreground      Foreground      black
borderColor     BorderColor     @r{[foreground color]}
cursorColor     Foreground      @r{[foreground color]}
pointerColor    Foreground      @r{[foreground color]}
@end group
@end example

The window is created with a @code{backing_store} attribute of
@code{Always}.  The window's name and icon name are initialized to
@code{"scheme-graphics"}.


@node Utilities for X Graphics, Custom Operations on X Graphics Devices, X Graphics Type, X Graphics
@subsection Utilities for X Graphics

@deffn procedure x-graphics/open-display display-name
@cindex display, X graphics
@cindex X display, graphics
Opens a connection to the display whose name is @var{display-name},
returning a display object.  If unable to open a connection, @code{#f}
is returned.  @var{Display-name} is normally a string, which is an X
display name in the usual form; however, @code{#f} is also allowed,
meaning to use the value of the unix environment variable
@code{DISPLAY}.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure x-graphics/close-display display
Closes @var{display}; after calling this procedure, it is an error to
use @var{display} for any purpose.  Any windows that were previously
opened on @var{display} are destroyed and their resources returned to
the operating system.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure x-close-all-displays
Closes all open connections to X displays.  Equivalent to calling
@code{x-close-display} on all open displays.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure x-geometry-string x y width height
@cindex geometry string, X graphics
@cindex X geometry string, graphics
This procedure creates and returns a standard X geometry string from the
given arguments.  @var{X} and @var{y} must be either exact integers or
@code{#f}, while @var{width} and @var{height} must be either exact
non-negative integers or @code{#f}.  Usually either @var{x} and @var{y}
are both specified or both @code{#f}; similarly for @var{width} and
@var{height}.  If only one of the elements of such a pair is specified,
it is ignored.

Examples:

@example
@group
(x-geometry-string #f #f 100 200) @result{} "100x200"
(x-geometry-string 2 -3 100 200) @result{} "100x200+2-3"
(x-geometry-string 2 -3 #f #f) @result{} "+2-3"
@end group
@end example

Note that the @var{x} and @var{y} arguments cannot distinguish between
@code{+0} and @code{-0}, even though these have different meanings in X.
If either of those arguments is @code{0}, it means @code{+0} in X
terminology.  If you need to distinguish these two cases you must create
your own geometry string using Scheme's string and number primitives.
@end deffn

@node Custom Operations on X Graphics Devices,  , Utilities for X Graphics, X Graphics
@subsection Custom Operations on X Graphics Devices

Custom operations are invoked using the procedure
@code{graphics-operation}.  For example,

@example
(graphics-operation device 'set-foreground-color "blue")
@end example

@defop operation x-graphics-device set-background-color color-name
@defopx operation x-graphics-device set-foreground-color color-name
@defopx operation x-graphics-device set-border-color color-name
@defopx operation x-graphics-device set-mouse-color color-name
@findex graphics-clear
These operations change the colors associated with a window.
@var{Color-name} must be a string, which is the X server's name for the
desired color.  @code{set-border-color} and @code{set-mouse-color}
immediately change the border and mouse-cursor colors.
@code{set-background-color} and @code{set-foreground-color} change the
colors to be used when drawing, but have no effect on anything drawn
prior to their invocation.  Because changing the background color
affects the entire window, we recommend calling @code{graphics-clear} on
the window's device afterwards.  Color names include both mnemonic
names, like @code{"red"}, and intensity names specified in the
@code{"#@var{rrggbb}"} notation.
@end defop

@defop operation x-graphics-device draw-arc x y radius-x radius-y angle-start angle-sweep fill?
@cindex drawing arcs and circles, graphics
@cindex graphics, drawing arcs and circles
@cindex circles, drawing
@findex draw-arc

Operation @code{draw-arc} draws or fills an arc.  An arc is a segment of
a circle, which may have been stretched along the x- or y- axis to form
an ellipse.

The parameters @var{x}, @var{y}, @var{radius-x} and @var{radius-y}
describe the circle and @var{angle-start} and @var{angle-sweep} choose
which part of the circle is drawn.  The arc is drawn on the graphics
device with the center of the circle at the virtual coordinates given by
@var{x} and @var{y}.  @var{radius-x} and @var{radius-y} determine the
size of the circle in virtual coordinate units.

The parameter @var{angle-start} determines where the arc starts.  It is
measured in degrees in an anti-clockwise direction, starting at 3
o'clock.  @var{angle-sweep} determines how much of the circle is drawn.
It too is measured anti-clockwise in degrees.  A negative value means
the measurement is in a clockwise direction.

Note that the angles are determined on a unit circle before it is
stretched into an ellipse, so the actual angles that you will see on the
computer screen depends on all of: @var{radius-x} and @var{radius-y},
the window size, and the virtual coordinates.

If @var{fill?} is @code{#f} then just the segment of the circle is
drawn, otherwise the arc is filled in a pie-slice fashion.

This draws a quarter circle pie slice, standing on its point, with point
at virtual coordinates (3,5):

@example
(graphics-opereration g 'draw-arc 3 5 .5 .5 45 90 #t)
@end example

@end defop

@defop operation x-graphics-device draw-circle x y radius
@defopx operation x-graphics-device fill-circle x y radius
@cindex drawing arcs and circles, graphics
@cindex graphics, drawing arcs and circles
@cindex circles, drawing
@findex draw-circle
@findex fill-circle
These operations draw a circle (outline) or a filled circle (solid) at
on the graphics device at the virtual coordinates given by @var{x} and
@var{y}.  These operations could be implemented trivially interms of the
@code{draw-arc} operation.
@end defop

@defop operation x-graphics-device set-border-width width
@defopx operation x-graphics-device set-internal-border-width width
@findex graphics-clear
These operations change the external and internal border widths of a
window.  @var{Width} must be an exact non-negative integer, specified in
pixels.  The change takes place immediately.  Note that changing the
internal border width can cause displayed graphics to be garbled; we
recommend calling @code{graphics-clear} on the window's device after
doing so.
@end defop

@defop operation x-graphics-device set-font font-name
Changes the font used when drawing text in a window.  @var{Font-name}
must be a string that is a font name known to the X server.  This
operation does not affect text drawn prior to its invocation.
@end defop

@defop operation x-graphics-device set-mouse-shape shape-number
Changes the shape of the mouse cursor.  @var{Shape-number} is an exact
non-negative integer that is used as an index into the mouse-shape font;
when multiplied by 2 this number corresponds to an index in the file@*
@file{/usr/include/X11/cursorfont.h}.
@end defop

@defop operation x-graphics-device map-window
@defopx operation x-graphics-device withdraw-window
These operations control the mapping of windows.  They correspond
directly to Xlib's @code{XMapWindow} and @code{XWithdrawWindow}.
@end defop

@defop operation x-graphics-device resize-window width height
Changes the size of a window.  @var{Width} and @var{height} must be
exact non-negative integers.  The operation corresponds directly to
Xlib's @code{XResizeWindow}.

This operation resets the virtual coordinate system and the clip
rectangle.
@end defop

@defop operation x-graphics-device move-window x y
Changes the position of a window on the display.  @var{X} and @var{y}
must be exact integers.  The operation corresponds directly to Xlib's
@code{XMoveWindow}.  Note that the coordinates @var{x} and @var{y} do
not take the external border into account, and therefore will not
position the window as you might like.  The only reliable way to
position a window is to ask a window manager to do it for you.
@end defop

@defop operation x-graphics-device get-default resource property
This operation corresponds directly to Xlib's @code{XGetDefault}.
@var{Resource} and @var{property} must be strings.  The operation
returns the character string corresponding to the association of
@var{resource} and @var{property}; if no such association exists,
@code{#f} is returned.
@end defop

@defop operation x-graphics-device copy-area source-x-left source-y-top width height destination-x-left destination-y-top
This operation copies the contents of the rectangle specified by
@var{source-x-left}, @var{source-y-top}, @var{width}, and @var{height} to
the rectangle of the same dimensions at @var{destination-x-left} and
@var{destination-y-top}.
@end defop

@defop operation x-graphics-device font-structure font-name
Returns a Scheme equivalent of the X font structure for the font named
@var{font-name}.  If the string @var{font-name} does not name a font
known to the X server, or names a 16-bit font, @code{#f} is returned.
@end defop

@deffn procedure x-font-structure/name font-structure
@deffnx procedure x-font-structure/direction font-structure
@deffnx procedure x-font-structure/all-chars-exist font-structure
@deffnx procedure x-font-structure/default-char font-structure
@deffnx procedure x-font-structure/min-bounds font-structure
@deffnx procedure x-font-structure/max-bounds font-structure
@deffnx procedure x-font-structure/start-index font-structure
@deffnx procedure x-font-structure/character-bounds font-structure
@deffnx procedure x-font-structure/max-ascent font-structure
@deffnx procedure x-font-structure/max-descent font-structure
These procedures extract the components of the font description
structure returned by the X graphics operation @code{font-structure}.  A
more complete description of these components appears in documentation
of the @code{XLoadQueryFont} Xlib call.  @code{start-index} is the index
of the first character available in the font.  The @code{min-bounds} and
@code{max-bounds} components are structures of type
@code{x-character-bounds}, and the @code{character-bounds} component is
a vector of the same type.
@end deffn

@deffn procedure x-character-bounds/lbearing character-bounds
@deffnx procedure x-character-bounds/rbearing character-bounds
@deffnx procedure x-character-bounds/width character-bounds
@deffnx procedure x-character-bounds/ascent character-bounds
@deffnx procedure x-character-bounds/descent character-bounds
These procedures extract components of objects of type
@code{x-character-bounds}.  A more complete description of them appears
in documentation of the@* @code{XLoadQueryFont} Xlib call.
@end deffn

@node Win32 Graphics, OS/2 Graphics, X Graphics, Graphics
@section Win32 Graphics
@cindex Win32 graphics

MIT/GNU Scheme supports graphics on Microsoft Windows 95, Windows 98, and
Windows NT.  In addition to the usual operations, there are operations
to control the size, position and colors of a graphics window.  Win32
devices support images, which are implemented as device independent
bitmaps (@sc{dib}s).

The Win32 graphics device type is implemented as a top level window.
@code{graphics-enable-buffering} is implemented and gives a 2x to 4x
speedup on many graphics operations.  As a convenience, when buffering
is enabled clicking on the graphics window's title bar effects a
@code{graphics-flush} operation.  The user has the benefit of the
increased performance and the ability to view the progress in drawing at
the click of a mouse button.


@menu
* Win32 Graphics Type::         
* Custom Operations for Win32 Graphics::  Custom Operations for Win32 Graphics Devices
@end menu

@node Win32 Graphics Type, Custom Operations for Win32 Graphics, Win32 Graphics, Win32 Graphics
@subsection Win32 Graphics Type

Win32 graphics devices are created by specifying the symbol @code{win32}
as the @var{graphics-device-type} argument to
@code{make-graphics-device}.  The Win32 graphics device type is
implemented as a top-level window and supports color drawing in addition
to the standard Scheme graphics operations.

Graphics devices are opened as follows:

@example
(make-graphics-device 'win32 #!optional @var{width} @var{height} @var{palette})
@end example

@noindent
where @var{width} and @var{height} specify the size, in pixels, of the
drawing area in the graphics window (i.e.@: excluding the frame).
@var{Palette} determines the colors available for drawing in the window.

When a color is specified for drawing, the nearest color available in
the palette is used.  Permitted values for @var{palette} are

@table @asis
@item @code{'grayscale}
The window allocates colors from a grayscale palette
of approximately 236 shades of gray.

@item @code{'grayscale-128}
The window allocates colors from a grayscale palette of 128 shades of
gray.

@item @code{'standard}
The standard palette has good selection of colors and grays.

@item @code{#f} or @code{'system}
The colors available are those in the system palette.  There are usually
16 to 20 colors in the system palette and these are usually sufficent
for simple applications like line drawings and x-vs-y graphs of
mathematical functions.  Drawing with the system palette can be more
efficient.

@end table
@noindent
If @var{palette} is not specified then the @code{standard} palette is
used.



@node Custom Operations for Win32 Graphics,  , Win32 Graphics Type, Win32 Graphics
@subsection Custom Operations for Win32 Graphics

Custom operations are invoked using the procedure
@code{graphics-operation}.  For example,

@example
(graphics-operation device 'set-foreground-color "blue")
@end example

@defop operation win32-graphics-device set-background-color color-name
@defopx operation win32-graphics-device set-foreground-color color-name
@findex set-background-color
@findex set-foreground-color
@cindex color
These operations change the colors associated with a window.
@var{Color-name} must be of one of the valid color specification forms
listed below.  @code{set-background-color} and
@code{set-foreground-color} change the colors to be used when drawing,
but have no effect on anything drawn prior to their invocation.  Because
changing the background color affects the entire window, we recommend
calling @code{graphics-clear} on the window's device afterwards.

The foreground color affects the drawing of text, points, lines,
ellipses and filled polygons.

Colors are specified in one of three ways:

@table @asis
@item An integer
This is the Win32 internal RGB value.

@item By name
A limited number of names are understood by the system.
Names are strings, e.g.@: @code{"red"}, @code{"blue"}, @code{"black"}.
More names can be registered with the @code{define-color} operation.

@item RGB (Red-Green-Blue) triples
A triple is either a vector or list of three integers in the range
0--255 inclusive which specify the intensity of the red, green and blue
components of the color.  Thus @code{#(0 0 0)} is black, @code{(0 0
128)} is dark blue and @code{#(255 255 255)} is white.
@end table

@noindent
If the color is not available in the graphics device then the nearest
available color is used instead.
@end defop


@defop operation win32-graphics-device define-color name spec
Define the string @var{name} to be the color specified by @var{spec}.
@var{Spec} may be any acceptable color specification.  Note that the
color names defined this way are available to any Win32 graphics device,
and the names do @emph{not} have to be defined for each device.


Color names defined by this interface may also be used when setting the
colors of the Scheme console window, or the colors of Edwin editor
windows.
@end defop

@defop operation win32-graphics-device find-color name
Looks up a color previously defined by @code{define-color}.  This returns
the color in its most efficient form for operations
@code{set-foreground-color} or @code{set-background-color}.
@end defop


@defop operation win32-graphics-device draw-ellipse left top right bottom
@cindex ellipse, graphics
@cindex circle, graphics
@cindex graphics, ellipse
@cindex graphics, circle
Draw an ellipse.  @var{Left}, @var{top}, @var{right} and @var{bottom}
indicate the coordinates of the bounding rectangle of the ellipse.
Circles are merely ellipses with equal width and height.  Note that the
bounding rectangle has horizontal and vertical sides.  Ellipses with
rotated axes cannot be drawn.  The rectangle applies to the center of the
line used to draw the ellipse; if the line width has been set to greater
than 1 then the ellipse will spill outside the bounding rectange by half
of the line width.
@end defop


@defop operation win32-graphics-device fill-polygon points
@findex fill-polygon
Draws a filled polygon using the current foreground color.
@var{Points} is a vector of real numbers.
The numbers are in the order x1 y1 x2 y2 @dots{} xn yn.
For example,

@example
(graphics-operation device 'fill-polygon #(0 0 0 1 1 0))
@end example

@noindent
draws a solid triangular region between the points (0, 0), (0, 1) and
(1, 0).
@end defop


@defop operation win32-graphics-device load-bitmap pathname
@cindex bitmaps
The graphics device contents and size are initialized from the windows
bitmap file specified by @var{pathname}.  If no file type is supplied
then a @code{".BMP"} extension is added.  If a clip rectangle is in
effect when this procedure is called, it is necessary to redefine the
clip rectangle afterwards.
@end defop

@defop operation win32-graphics-device save-bitmap pathname
@cindex printing graphics output
The graphics device contents are saved as a bitmap to the file specified
by @var{pathname}.  If no file type is supplied then a @code{".BMP"}
extension is added.  The saved bitmap may be incorporated into documents
or printed.
@end defop

@defop operation win32-graphics-device move-window x y
The graphics device window is moved to the screen position specified by
@var{x} and @var{y}.
@end defop

@defop operation win32-graphics-device resize-window width height
The graphics device window is resized to the specified @var{width} and
@var{height} in device coordinates (pixels).  If a clip rectangle is in effect
when this procedure is called, it is necessary to redefine the clip
rectangle afterwards.
@end defop

@defop operation win32-graphics-device set-line-width width
This operation sets the line width for future drawing of lines, points
and ellipses.  It does not affect existing lines and has no effect on
filled polygons.  The line width is specified in device units.  The
default and initial value of this parameter is 1 pixel.
@end defop

@defop operation win32-graphics-device set-window-name name
This sets the window title to the string @var{name}.  The window is
given the name @code{"Scheme Graphics"} at creation.
@end defop

@defop operation win32-graphics-device set-font handle
Sets the font for drawing text.  Currently not well supported.  If you
can get a Win32 font handle it can be used here.
@end defop

@defop operation win32-graphics-device copy-area source-x-left source-y-top width height destination-x-left destination-y-top
This operation copies the contents of the rectangle specified by
@var{source-x-left}, @var{source-y-top}, @var{width}, and @var{height}
to the rectangle of the same dimensions at @var{destination-x-left} and
@var{destination-y-top}.
@end defop

@node OS/2 Graphics,  , Win32 Graphics, Graphics
@section OS/2 Graphics
@cindex OS/2 graphics

MIT/GNU Scheme supports graphics under the OS/2 Presentation Manager in
OS/2 version 2.1 and later.  The OS/2 graphics device type is
implemented as a top level window.  In addition to the usual operations,
there are operations to control the size, position, and colors of a
graphics window.  OS/2 graphics devices support images, which are
implemented as memory presentation spaces.

The custom graphics operations defined in this section are invoked using
the procedure @code{graphics-operation}.  For example,

@example
(graphics-operation device 'set-foreground-color "blue")
@end example

@menu
* OS/2 Graphics Type::          
* Color Operations for OS/2 Graphics::  
* Window Operations for OS/2 Graphics::  
* Event Operations for OS/2 Graphics::  
* Miscellaneous Operations for OS/2 Graphics::  
@end menu

@node OS/2 Graphics Type, Color Operations for OS/2 Graphics, OS/2 Graphics, OS/2 Graphics
@subsection OS/2 Graphics Type

OS/2 graphics devices are created by specifying the symbol
@code{os/2} as the @var{graphics-device-type} argument to
@code{make-graphics-device}.  The OS/2 graphics device type is
implemented as a top-level window and supports color drawing in addition
to the standard Scheme graphics operations.

Graphics devices are opened as follows:

@example
(make-graphics-device 'os/2 #!optional @var{width} @var{height})
@end example

@noindent
where @var{width} and @var{height} specify the size, in pixels, of the
drawing area in the graphics window (i.e.@: excluding the frame).

@node Color Operations for OS/2 Graphics, Window Operations for OS/2 Graphics, OS/2 Graphics Type, OS/2 Graphics
@subsection Color Operations for OS/2 Graphics

These operations control the colors used when drawing on an OS/2
graphics device.

@defop operation os2-graphics-device color?
@findex color?
This operation returns @code{#t} if the display supports color.
@end defop

@defop operation os2-graphics-device set-background-color color-name
@defopx operation os2-graphics-device set-foreground-color color-name
@findex set-background-color
@findex set-foreground-color
@cindex color
These operations change the colors associated with a window.
@var{Color-name} must be one of the valid color specification forms
listed below.  @code{set-background-color} and
@code{set-foreground-color} change the colors to be used when drawing,
but have no effect on anything drawn prior to their invocation.  Because
changing the background color affects the entire window, we recommend
calling @code{graphics-clear} on the window's device afterwards.

The foreground color affects the drawing of text, points, and lines.
Colors are specified in one of these ways:

@table @asis
@item An integer between @code{0} and @code{#xffffff} inclusive
This is the OS/2 internal RGB value.

@item By name
A limited number of names are understood by the system.  Names are
strings, e.g.@: @code{"red"}, @code{"blue"}, @code{"black"}.  More names
can be registered with the @code{define-color} operation.

@item RGB (Red-Green-Blue) triples
A triple is a list of three integers between @code{0} and @code{#xff}
inclusive which specify the intensity of the red, green and blue
components of the color.  Thus @code{(0 0 0)} is black, @code{(0 0 128)}
is dark blue and @code{(255 255 255)} is white.
@end table

@noindent
If the color is not available in the graphics device then the nearest
available color is used instead.
@end defop

@defop operation os2-graphics-device define-color name spec
Define the string @var{name} to be the color specified by @var{spec}.
@var{Spec} may be any acceptable color specification.  Note that the
color names defined this way are available to any OS/2 graphics
device, and the names do @emph{not} have to be defined for each device.

Color names defined by this interface may also be used when setting the
colors of the Scheme console window, or the colors of Edwin editor
windows.
@end defop

@defop operation os2-graphics-device find-color name
Looks up a color previously defined by @code{define-color}.  This
returns the color in its most efficient form for operations
@code{set-foreground-color} or @code{set-background-color}.
@end defop

@node Window Operations for OS/2 Graphics, Event Operations for OS/2 Graphics, Color Operations for OS/2 Graphics, OS/2 Graphics
@subsection Window Operations for OS/2 Graphics

These operations control the window that contains the OS/2 graphics
device.  They provide facilities to change the window's size and
position; to raise and lower the window relative to other windows on the
desktop; to hide or minimize the window, and to restore it from the
hidden or minimized state; to activate or deactivate the window (that
is, control the keyboard focus); and to control the text that appears in
the window's title bar.

@defop operation os2-graphics-device window-position
This operation returns the position of the graphics-device window on the
desktop.  The position is returned as two values
(@pxref{Continuations}), which are the x and y coordinates of the
position.  These coordinates are in units of pels (pixels), and measure
the distance between the lower left hand corner of the desktop and the
lower left hand corner of the graphics device window's frame.
@end defop

@defop operation os2-graphics-device set-window-position x y
The graphics-device window is moved to the screen position specified by
@var{x} and @var{y}.  The coordinates @var{x} and @var{y} are in units
of pels (pixels), and measure the distance between the lower left hand
corner of the desktop and the lower left hand corner of the graphics
device window's frame.
@end defop

@defop operation os2-graphics-device window-size
This operation returns the size of the client area of the
graphics-device window.  The client area is the part of the window that
you draw on; it does not include the window frame, title bar, etc.  The
size is returned as two values (@pxref{Continuations}), which are the
width and height of the client area in units of pels (pixels).
@end defop

@defop operation os2-graphics-device set-window-size width height
This operation sets the size of the client area of the graphics-device
window to the specified @var{width} and @var{height}, which are in units
of pels (pixels).  The client area is the part of the window that you
draw on; it does not include the window frame, title bar, etc.
@end defop

@defop operation os2-graphics-device window-frame-size
This operation returns the size of the graphics-device window's frame.
This includes the client area, as well as the border, title bar, etc.
The size is returned as two values (@pxref{Continuations}), which are
the width and height of the frame in units of pels (pixels).

The frame size is useful in conjunction with the window position and the
desktop size to determine relative placement of the window or to
guarantee that the entire window is visible on the desktop.
@end defop

@defop operation os2-graphics-device desktop-size
This operation returns the size of the OS/2 desktop.  The size is
returned as two values (@pxref{Continuations}), which are the width and
height of the frame in units of pels (pixels).
@end defop

@defop operation os2-graphics-device raise-window
This operation raises the graphics-device window so that it is on top of
any other windows on the desktop.
@end defop

@defop operation os2-graphics-device lower-window
This operation lowers the graphics-device window so that it is below all
other windows on the desktop.
@end defop

@defop operation os2-graphics-device hide-window
This operation hides the graphics-device window.  The window disappears
from the desktop, but still appears in the window list.
@end defop

@defop operation os2-graphics-device minimize-window
This operation minimizes the graphics-device window.  The window
disappears from the desktop, but still appears in the window list.
Depending on how you have configured your desktop, the window may appear
as an icon, either on the desktop or in the minimized window viewer.
@end defop

@defop operation os2-graphics-device maximize-window
This operation maximizes the graphics-device window.  This causes the
window to fill the entire desktop.
@end defop

@defop operation os2-graphics-device restore-window
This operation restores the graphics-device window to its normal state.
If the window is hidden or minimized, it is shown again, at its former
position on the desktop.  If the window is maximized, it is returned to
its normal size.
@end defop

@defop operation os2-graphics-device activate-window
This operation makes the graphics-device window be the active window.
This causes the window to be put in front of all other windows on the
desktop, highlights its frame, and gives it the keyboard focus.
@end defop

@defop operation os2-graphics-device deactivate-window
This operation deactivates the graphics-device window if it was active
(otherwise it has no effect).  This causes some other window to be
chosen to be active in its place.
@end defop

@defop operation os2-graphics-device set-window-title title
This operation changes the text that appears in the graphics device
window's title bar.  The new text is given by @var{title}, which must be
a string.
@end defop

@node Event Operations for OS/2 Graphics, Miscellaneous Operations for OS/2 Graphics, Window Operations for OS/2 Graphics, OS/2 Graphics
@subsection Event Operations for OS/2 Graphics

These operations allow you to read some of the events that are generated
by the Presentation Manager and put in the message queue of a
graphics-device window.

@defop operation os2-graphics-device read-button
This operation waits for the user to push a mouse button inside the
client area of the graphics-device window.  It then returns four values
(@pxref{Continuations}) which are: the button number; the x and y
coordinates of the mouse pointer at the time the button was pressed, in
pels (pixels) relative to the lower left hand corner of the client area;
and the graphics device that the mouse pointer was over at the time the
button was pressed.

Note that this operation only works when button events are selected
(which is the default).
@end defop

@defop operation os2-graphics-device select-user-events mask
This operation sets the event-selection mask for the graphics device to
@var{mask}.  The event-selection mask is an exact non-negative integer
that specifies which types of incoming events are to be saved in the
user-event queue for later retrieval by the @code{read-user-event}
operation.  The mask is specified by setting the bits corresponding to
the event types that you are interested in, as follows:

@example
@group
Number  Mask    Description
------  -----   -----------
0       #x001   Button press/release
1       #x002   Close (close the window) [WM_CLOSE]
2       #x004   Focus change [WM_SETFOCUS]
3       #x008   Key press/release [WM_CHAR]
4       #x010   Paint [WM_PAINT]
5       #x020   Size change [WM_SIZE]
6       #x040   Visibility change [WM_SHOW]
7       #x080   Command [WM_COMMAND]
8       #x100   Help [WM_HELP]
9       #x200   Mouse-move [WM_MOUSEMOVE]
@end group
@end example

@noindent
Note that this operation does not affect any events that are already in
the user-event queue.  Changing the mask only affects what events will
be added to the queue in the future.
@end defop

@defop operation os2-graphics-device read-user-event
This operation returns the next user event available from the user-event
queue.  If there are no events in the queue, the operation waits for an
event to arrive before returning.
@end defop

An event is a vector whose first element is the event-type number, whose
second element is the graphics device that the event refers to, and
whose remaining elements provide information about the event.  Here is a
table of the possible event types and their vector layout:

@table @code
@item #(0 @var{device} @var{number} @var{type} @var{x} @var{y} @var{flags})
A button event.  @var{Number} is the button number, for example button
number @code{0} is usually the left mouse button, @code{1} is usually
the right button, etc.  @var{Type} specifies what occurred: @code{0}
means the button was pressed, @code{1} means the button was released,
@code{2} means the button was clicked, and @code{3} means the button was
double clicked.  @var{X} and @var{y} are the position of the mouse
pointer at the time of the event, in units of pels (pixels) measured
from the lower left corner of the client area of the associated window.
Finally, @var{flags} specifies what shift keys were pressed at the time
of the button event; it is a mask word created by combining zero or more
of the following flags: @code{#x08} means the shift key was pressed,
@code{#x10} means the control key was pressed, and @code{#x20} means the
alt key was pressed.

@item #(1 @var{device})
A close event.  The user has selected the close button from the system
menu, or typed @key{Alt-f4}.

@item #(2 @var{device} @var{gained?})
A focus event.  If @var{gained?} is @code{#t}, the keyboard focus is
being gained, and if @var{gained?} is @code{#f}, it is being lost.

@item #(3 @var{device} @var{code} @var{flags} @var{repeat})
A keyboard event.  This is much too complicated to describe here.  See
the OS/2 toolkit documentation for details.

@item #(4 @var{device} @var{xl} @var{xh} @var{yl} @var{yh})
A paint event.  Part of the graphics-device window that was obscured has
been revealed and the Presentation Manager is informing the window that
it must repaint that area.  Scheme will take care of the painting for
you, so this event isn't very useful.

@item #(5 @var{device} @var{width} @var{height})
A size-change event.  The size of the graphics-device window has
changed, and @var{width} and @var{height} specify the new size in pels
(pixels).

@item #(6 @var{device} @var{shown?})
A visibility event.  Indicates that the graphics-device window has been
hidden or revealed.  If @var{shown?} is @code{#f}, the window is hidden,
and if it is @code{#t}, the window is shown.

@item #(7 @var{device} @var{source} @var{mouse?})
@itemx #(8 @var{device} @var{source} @var{mouse?})
A menu command.  @var{Source} specifies which menu item was selected to
cause this event, and @var{mouse?} is a boolean indicating whether the
item was selected with the mouse or the keyboard.  The event-type number
@code{7} indicates a command from a @samp{WM_COMMAND} message, while
@code{8} is a command from a @samp{WM_HELP} message.

@item #(9 @var{device} @var{x} @var{y} @var{hit-test} @var{flags})
The mouse was moved.  @var{X} and @var{y} specify the position of the
mouse, @var{hit-test} contains the hit-test information, and @var{flags}
specifies the modifier keys that were pressed at the time.
@end table

@defop operation os2-graphics-device discard-events
This operation discards any events that are in the user-event queue.
This is sometimes useful when you want to prompt the user for some input
and don't want to consider any previous input.
@end defop

@node Miscellaneous Operations for OS/2 Graphics,  , Event Operations for OS/2 Graphics, OS/2 Graphics
@subsection Miscellaneous Operations for OS/2 Graphics

These operations allow you to: change the font used for drawing text in
a graphics-device window; take a snapshot of a graphics-device window
and return it as an image object; and draw multiple lines efficiently.

@defop operation os2-graphics-device set-font font-name
This operation sets the font used for drawing text in the
graphics-device window.  @var{Font-name} is a string describing the
font; this string is in the form "<point-size>.<family-name>", for
example, @code{"10.Courier"}.  You may specify any fixed-pitch font
family, in any point size that is supported for that font family.  This
includes both image fonts and outline fonts.
@end defop

@defop operation os2-graphics-device capture-image x-left y-bottom x-right y-top
This operation creates and returns an image that contains part of the
client area of the graphics-device window.  The portion of the client
area that is selected is specified by the four coordinate arguments,
which are given in the current virtual coordinates for the device.
@xref{Images}, for more information about manipulating images.
@end defop

@defop operation os2-graphics-device draw-lines xv yv
This operation draws multiple disjoint lines; it is like multiple calls
to @code{graphics-draw-line} but much faster.  The arguments @var{xv}
and @var{yv} are vectors of coordinates; these vectors must be the same
length, and the length must be a multiple of two.  The contents of the
vectors are alternating start/end pairs.  For example, the following are
equivalent:

@example
@group
(graphics-draw-line device xs ys xe ye)
(graphics-operation device 'draw-lines
                    (vector xs xe)
                    (vector ys ye))
@end group
@end example
@end defop
