.TH "scheme" "1" "7.8.0" "MIT/GNU Scheme Team" ""
.SH "NAME"
.LP 
MIT/GNU Scheme \- Scheme development environment
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.LP 
.B scheme
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.br 
.B bchscheme
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.br 
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.LP 
MIT/GNU Scheme is an implementation of the Scheme programming
language, providing an interpreter, compiler, source\-code debugger,
integrated Emacs\-like editor, and a large runtime library.  MIT/GNU
Scheme is best suited to programming large applications with a rapid
development cycle.
.LP 
There are two executable programs.  The programs are functionally
identical, but use different garbage collectors.
The
.B scheme
program uses a standard two\-space copying garbage collector.  This
optimizes performance but uses a lot of memory.  The
.B bchscheme
program uses a special two\-space copying garbage collector with one
heap in memory and the other on the disk.  This makes garbage
collection slower but uses less memory.
.SH "OPTIONS"
.LP 
These are some of the more common command\-line options.  For full
information about available options, see the Texinfo documentation.
.TP 
\-\-compiler
.br 
Load the native\-code compiler.
.TP 
\-\-edwin
.br 
Load the Emacs\-like text editor.
.TP 
.RI \-\-heap " NBLOCKS"
.br 
Specify the size of the heap in 1024\-word blocks.
The default heap size is 1000 blocks if either \-\-compiler or \-\-edwin
is specified, and 250 blocks otherwise.
.TP 
.RI \-\-stack " NBLOCKS"
.br 
Specify the size of the stack in 1024\-word blocks.
The default stack size is 100 blocks.
.TP 
.RI \-\-library " PATH"
.br 
Specify where to look for Scheme's binary files.
.I PATH
should be a colon\-separated list of directory names.
.TP 
\-\-no\-init\-file
.br 
Don't load the user's init file.
.TP 
\-\-edit
.br 
Start the text editor automatically.  Meaningful only when combined
with the \-\-edwin option.
.TP 
.RI \-\-eval " EXPRESSION" ...
.br 
Evaluate the specified expressions after starting Scheme.
.TP 
.RI \-\-load " FILENAME" ...
.br 
Load the specified files after starting Scheme.
.TP 
\-\-option\-summary
.br 
Print a summary of the command\-line options, including default values.
.SH "FILES"
.LP 
\fI/usr/local/lib/mit\-scheme\fP 
.SH "ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES"
.LP 
MIT/GNU Scheme refers to a large number of environment variables.  See
the Texinfo documentation for details.
.SH "EXAMPLES"
.LP 
To use the interpreter without any frills, type:
.LP 
.B scheme
.LP 
To also load the compiler, type:
.LP 
.B scheme
\-\-compiler
.LP 
To load the compiler and editor, type:
.LP 
.B scheme
\-\-compiler \-\-edwin \-\-edit
.SH "AUTHORS"
.LP 
MIT/GNU Scheme Team <bug\-mit\-scheme@gnu.org>
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.LP
The full documentation for MIT/GNU Scheme is maintained as a set of
Texinfo manuals.
If the
.B info
program is properly installed at your site, the command
.IP
.B info
"MIT/GNU Scheme User"
.PP
should give you access to the complete User's manual.  Programming
information is located in the Info topics "MIT/GNU Scheme Ref" and
"SOS".  Usage of the
.B IMAIL
mail reader is located in the "IMAIL" topic.
