.TH "scheme" "1" "7.8.0" "MIT/GNU Scheme Team" ""
.SH "NAME"
.LP 
MIT/GNU Scheme \- Scheme development environment
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.LP 
.B scheme
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.br 
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.LP 
MIT/GNU Scheme is an implementation of the Scheme programming
language, providing an interpreter, compiler, source\-code debugger,
integrated Emacs\-like editor, and a large runtime library.  MIT/GNU
Scheme is best suited to programming large applications with a rapid
development cycle.
.SH "OPTIONS"
.LP 
These are some of the more common command\-line options.  For full
information about available options, see the Texinfo documentation.
Additional options may also be supported by the band.  Use the
\-\-help option (last) to see descriptions of all available
command\-line options.
.TP 
.RI \-\-version
.br 
Report various version numbers, then exit.
.TP 
.RI \-\-heap " NBLOCKS"
.br 
Specify the size of the heap in 1024\-word blocks.
.TP 
.RI \-\-stack " NBLOCKS"
.br 
Specify the size of the stack in 1024\-word blocks.
.TP 
.RI \-\-library " PATH"
.br 
Specify where to look for Scheme's binary files.
.I PATH
should be a colon\-separated list of directory names.
.TP 
\-\-option\-summary
.br 
Print the actual values of the machine parameters (like those above).
.TP 
\-\-no\-init\-file
.br 
Don't load the user's init file (~/.scheme.init or scheme.ini).
.TP 
\-\-edit
.br 
Start the text editor after starting Scheme.
.TP 
.RI \-\-eval " EXPRESSION" ...
.br 
Evaluate the specified expressions after starting Scheme.
.TP 
.RI \-\-load " FILENAME" ...
.br 
Load the specified files after starting Scheme.
.SH "FILES"
.LP 
\fI/usr/local/lib/mit\-scheme\fP 
.SH "ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES"
.LP 
MIT/GNU Scheme refers to a large number of environment variables.  See
the Texinfo documentation for details.
.SH "AUTHORS"
.LP 
MIT/GNU Scheme Team <bug\-mit\-scheme@gnu.org>
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.LP
The full documentation for MIT/GNU Scheme is maintained as a set of
Texinfo manuals.
If the
.B info
program is properly installed at your site, the command
.IP
.B info
"MIT/GNU Scheme User"
.PP
should give you access to the complete User's manual.  Programming
information is located in the Info topics "MIT/GNU Scheme Ref" and
"SOS".  Usage of the
.B IMAIL
mail reader is located in the "IMAIL" topic.
